11. WINNERS AND LOSERS 
We come to the market from different walks of life and bring with us the 
mental baggage of our upbringing and prior experiences. Most of us find that 
when we act in the market the way we do in our everyday life, we lose 
money. 
Your success or failure in the market depends on your thoughts and feel - 
ings. It depends on your attitudes toward gain and risk, fear and greed, and 
on how you handle the excitement of trading and risk. 
Most of all, your success or failure depends on your ability to use your 
intellect rather than act out your emotions. A trader who feels overjoyed 
when he wins and depressed when he loses cannot accumulate equity 
because he is controlled by his emotions. If you let the market make you feel 
high or low, you will lose money. 
To be a winner in the market you must know yourself and act coolly and 
responsibly. The pain of losing scares people into looking for magic meth - 
ods. At the same time, they discard much of what is useful in their profes - 
sional or business backgrounds. 
Like an Ocean 
The market is like an ocean-it moves up and down regardless of what you 
want. You may feel joy when you buy a stock and it explodes in a rally. You 
may feel drenched with fear when you go short but the market rises and your 
equity melts with every uptick. These feelings have nothing to do with the 
market - they exist only inside you. 
11. WINNERS AND LOSERS 39 
The market does not know you exist. You can do nothing to influence it. 
You can only control your behavior. 
The ocean does not care about your welfare, but it has no wish to hurt you 
either. You may feel joy on a sunny day, when a gentle wind pushes your 
sailboat where you want it to go. You may feel panic on a stormy day when 
the ocean pushes your boat toward the rocks. Your feelings about the ocean 
exist only in your mind. They threaten your survival when you let your feel - 
ings rather than intellect control your behavior. 
A sailor cannot control the ocean, but he can control himself. He studies 
currents and weather patterns. He learns safe sailing techniques and gains 
experience. He knows when to sail and when to stay in the harbor. A suc- 
cessful sailor uses his intelligence. 
An ocean can be useful-you can fish in it and use its surface to get to 
other islands. An ocean can be dangerous-you can drown in it. The more 
rational your approach, the more likely you are to getwhat you want. When 
you act out your emotions, you cannot focus on the reality of the ocean. 
A trader has to study trends and reversals in the market the way a sailor 
studies the ocean. He must trade on a small scale while learning to handle 
himself in the market. You can never control the market but you can learn to 
control yourself. 
A beginner who has a string of profitable trades often feels he can walk on 
water. He starts taking wild risks and blows up his account. On the other hand, 
an amateur who takes several losses in a row often feels so demoralized that he 
cannot place an order even when his system gives him a strong signal to buy or 
sell. If trading makes you feel elated or frightened, you cannot fully use your 
intellect. When joy sweeps you off your feet, you will make irrational trades 
and lose. When fear grips you, you'll miss profitable trades. 
A professional trader uses his head and stays calm. Only amateurs 
become excited or depressed because of their trades. Emotional reactions are 
a luxury that you cannot afford in the markets. 
Emotional Trading 
Most people crave excitement and entertainment. Singers, actors, and profes - 
sional athletes command much higher incomes in our society than do such 
mundane workmen as physicians, pilots, or college professors. People love 
to have their nerves tickled- they buy lottery tickets, fly to Las Vegas, and 
slow down to gawk at road accidents. 
INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY 
Trading is a heady experience and can be very addictive. Losers who drop 
money in the markets receive a tremendous entertainment value. 
The market is among the most entertaining places on the face of the Earth. 
It is a spectator sport and a participant sport rolled into one. Imagine going to 
a major-league ball game in which you are not confined to the bleachers. For 
a few hundred dollars you can run onto the field and join the game. If you hit 
the ball right, you will get paid like a professional. 
You would probably think twice before running onto the field the first few 
times. This cautious attitude is responsible for the well-known "beginner's 
luck." Once a beginner hits the ball well a few times and collects his pay, he 
is likely to get the idea that he is better than the pros and could make a good 
living at it. Greedy amateurs start running out onto the field too often, even 
when there are no good playing opportunities. Before they know what hit 
them, a short string of losses destroys their careers. 
Emotional decisions are lethal in the markets. You can see a good model 
of emotional trading by going to a racetrack, turning around, and watching 
the humans instead of the horses. Gamblers stomp their feet, jump up and 
down, and yell at horses and jockeys. Thousands of people act out their emo - 
tions. Winners embrace and losers tear up their tickets in disgust. The joy, 
the pain, and the intensity of wishful thinking are caricatures of what hap 
pens in the markets. A cool handicapper who tries to make a living at the 
track does not get excited, yell, or bet the bulk of his roll on any race. 
Casinos love drunk patrons. They pour gamblers free drinks because 
drunks are more emotional and gamble more. Casinos try to throw out intel- 
ligent card -counters. There is less freg liquor on Wall Street than in a casino, 
but at least here they do not throw you out of the game for being a good 
trader. 
In Charge of Your Life 
When a monkey hurts its foot on a tree stump, he flies into a rage and 
kicks the piece of wood. You laugh at a monkey, but do you laugh at your- 
self when you act like him? If the market drops while you are long, you 
may double up on your losing trade or else go short, trying to get even. 
You act emotionally instead of using your intellect. What is the difference 
between a trader trying to get back at the market and a monkey kicking a 
tree stump? Acting out of anger, fear, or elation destroys your chance of 
11. WINNERS AND LOSERS 41 
success. You have to analyze your behavior in the market instead of acting 
out your feelings. 
We get angry at the market, we become afraid of it, we develop silly 
superstitions. All the while, the market keeps cycling through its rallies and 
declines like an ocean going through its storms and calm periods. Mark 
Douglas writes in The Disciplined Trader that in the market, "There is no 
beginning, middle, or end-only what you create in your own mind. Rarely 
do any of us grow up learning to operate in an arena that allows for complete 
freedom of creative expression, with no external structure to restrict it in any 
way." 
We try to cajole or manipulate the market, acting like the ancient emperor 
Xerxes, who ordered his soldiers to horsewhip the sea for sinking his fleet. 
Most of us are not aware how manipulative we are, how we bargain, how we 
act out our feelings in the market. Most of us consider ourselves the center of 
the universe and expect every person or group to be either good or bad to us. 
This does not work in the market which is completely impersonal. 
Leston Havens, a Haward University psychiatrist, writes: "Cannibalism 
and slavery are probably the oldest manifestations of human predation and 
submission. Although both are now discouraged, their continued existence in 
psychological forms demonstrates that civilization has achieved great suc- 
cess in moving from the concrete and physical to the abstract and psycholog - 
ical, while persisting in the same purposes." Parents threaten their children, 
bullies hit them, teachers try to bend their will in school. Little wonder that 
most of us grow up either hiding in a shell or learning how to manipulate 
others in self-defense. Acting independently does not feel natural to us - but 
that is the only way to succeed in the market. 
Douglas warns, "If the market's behavior seems mysterious to you, it's 
because your own behavior is mysterious and unmanageable. You can't 
really determine what the market is likely to do next when you don't even 
know what you'll do next." Ultimately, "the one thing you can control is 
yourself. As a trader, you have the power either to give yourself money or to 
give your money to other traders." He adds, "The traders who can make 
money consistently . . . approach trading from the perspective of a mental 
discipline." 
Each trader has his own demons to exorcise on the journey to becoming a 
successful professional. Here are several rules that worked for me as I grew 
from a wild amateur into an erratic semiprofessional and finally into a pro- 
fessional trader. You may change this list to suit your personality. 
42 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY 
1. Decide that you are in the market for the long haul- that is, you want 
to be a trader even 20 years from now. 
2. Learn as much as you can. Read and listen to experts, but keep a 
degree of healthy skepticism about everything. Ask questions, and do 
not accept experts at their word. 
3. Do not get greedy and rush to trade - take your time to learn. The mar- 
kets will be there with more good opportunities in the months and 
years ahead. 
4. Develop a method for analyzing the market - that is, "If A happens, 
then B is likely to happen." Markets have many dimensions -use sev- 
eral analytic methods to confirm trades. Test everything on historical 
data and then in the markets, using real money. Markets keep chang - 
ing-you need different tools for trading bull and bear markets and 
transitional periods as well as a method for telling the difference (see 
the sections on technical analysis). 
5. Develop a money management plan. Your first goal must be long-term 
survival; your second goal, a steady growth of capital; and your third 
goal, making high profits. Most traders put the third goal first and are 
unaware that goals 1 and 2 exist (see Chapter 10, "Risk Management "). 
6. Be aware that a trader is the weakest link in any trading system. Go to 
a meeting of Alcoholics Anonymous to learn how to avoid losses or 
develop your own method for cutting out impulsive trades. 
7. Winners think, feel, and act differently than losers. You must look 
within yourself, strip away your illusions, and change your old ways 
of being, thinking, and acting. Change is hard, but if you want to be a 
professional trader, you have to work on changing your personality. 
Mass Psychology 
