12. WHAT IS PRICE? 
Wall Street is named after a wall that kept farm animals from wandering 
away from the settlement at the tip of Manhattan. The farming legacy lives 
on in the language of traders. Four animals are mentioned especially often on 
Wall Street: bulls and bears, hogs and sheep. Traders say: "Bulls make 
money, bears make money, but hogs get slaughtered. " 
A bull fights by striking up with his horns. A bull is a buyer-a person 
who bets on a rally and profits from a rise in prices. A bear fights by striking 
down with his paws. A bear is a seller - a person who bets on a decline and 
profits from a fall in prices. 
Hogs are greedy. They get slaughtered when they trade to satisfy their 
greed. Some hogs buy or sell positions that are too large for them and get 
destroyed by a small adverse move. Other hogs overstay their positions- 
they keep waiting for profits to get bigger even after the trend reverses. 
Sheep are passive and fearful followers of trends, tips, and gurus. They 
sometimes put on a bull's horns or a bearskin and try to swagger. You recog- 
nize them by their pitiful bleating when the market becomes volatile. 
Whenever the market is open, bulls are buying, bears are selling, hogs and 
sheep get trampled underfoot, and the undecided traders wait on the side- 
lines. Quote machines all over the world show a steady stream of quotes- 
the latest prices for any trading vehicle. Thousands of eyes are focused on 
each price quote as people make trading decisions. 
MASS PSYCHOLOGY 
Arguing About Price 
When I ask traders at a seminar, "What is price?" some answer, "Price is a 
perceived value." Others say, "Price is what a person at one particular point 
in time is willing to pay another person for a commodity. " Someone says, 
"Price is what the last person paid for it. That's the price right now." Another 
suggests, "No, it's what the next person will pay." 
Traders who cannot give a clear definition of price do not know what they 
are analyzing. Your success or failure as a trader depends on handling 
prices-and you had better know what they mean! Some attendees at the 
seminars I give become agitated as they search for an answer to a seemingly 
obvious question. Arguments fly back and forth, as in this discussion: 
I'll give you the worst-case example. In the 1929 crash, Singer stock was 
selling for $100 and all of sudden there's no bid, no bid, no bid, and 
somebody comes forth-"I gotta sell, what am I bid?" and one of the 
floor clerks said "one dollar" and he got it. He got the stock. 
Price is what the greater fool is ready to pay. 
Take the '87 market. All of that 500 -point decline - stocks weren't worth 
any less after the decline than before. So it was the difference in the 
perception and the willingness of the next person to pay for it. 
You might carry that one step further. What you're paying for is abso- 
lutely worthless. It is just a piece of paper. The only value that it does 
have is the intrinsic dividend value, compared to government paper at 
that time. 
It still has the value of whatever anybody will pay you. If no one wants to 
pay you for it, it has no value. 
It'll pay you for a yield. 
What if you trade soybeans? You can eat them. 
How about a stock that has no yield? 
But doesn't it have assets? 
The company that issued the stock has value, cash flow. 
I give you one share of IBM; if no one wants to buy it, you can light a 
cigarette with it. 
12. WHAT IS PRICE? 45 
There is no such thing that no one wants to buy IBM. There is always a 
bid and an ask. 
Take a look at United Airlines. One day the paper says it's $300 and the 
next day it's $150. 
There's no change in the airline, they're still making the same cash flow, 
they've still got the same book value, and the same assets-what's the 
difference? 
The price of stock has very little to do with the company it represents. The 
price of IBM stock has very little to do with IBM. As I visualize it, the 
price of stock is connected by a mile-long rubber band to IBM and it 
can be wildly higher and wildly lower-IBM just keeps chugging 
along and it's a very, very remote connection. 
Price is the intersection of supply and demand curves. 
Each serious trader must know the meaning of price. You need to know what 
you analyze before you go out and start buying and selling stocks, futures, or 
options. 
Resolving Conflict 
There are three groups of traders in the market: buyers, sellers, and unde- 
cided traders. "Ask" is what a seller asks for his merchandise. "Bid" is what 
a buyer offers for that merchandise. Buyers and sellers are always in conflict. 
Buyers want to pay as little as possible, and sellers want to charge as 
much as possible. If members of both groups insist on having their way, no 
trade can take place. No trade means no price - only wishful quotes of buy- 
ers and sellers. 
A seller has a choice: to wait until prices rise, or to accept a lower offer 
for his merchandise. A buyer also has a choice: to wait until prices come 
down, or to offer to pay more to the sellers. 
A trade occurs when there is a momentary meeting of two minds: An 
eager bull agrees to a seller's terms and pays up, or an eager bear agrees to a 
buyer's terms and sells a little cheaper. The presence of undecided traders 
puts pressure on both bulls and bears. 
When a buyer and a seller bargain in private, they may haggle at a 
46 MASS PSYCHOLOGY 
leisurely pace. The two must move much faster when they bargain at the 
exchange. They know that they are surrounded by a crowd of other traders 
who may butt in on their deal at any moment. 
The buyer knows that if he thinks for too long, another trader can step in 
and snap away his bargain. A seller knows that if he tries to hold out for a 
higher price, another trader may step in and sell at a lower price. The crowd 
of undecided traders makes buyers and sellers more anxious to accommodate 
their opponents. A trade occurs when there is a meeting of two minds. 
A Consensus of Value 
Each tick on your quote screen represents a deal between a buyer and a 
seller. Buyers are buying because they expect prices to rise. Sellers are sell- 
ing because they expect prices to fall. Buyers and sellers trade while sur- 
rounded by crowds of undecided traders. They may become buyers or sellers 
as prices change or as time passes. 
Buying by bulls pushes markets up, selling by bears pushes markets 
down, and undecided traders make everything happen faster by creating a 
sense of urgency in buyers and sellers. 
Traders come to the markets from all over the world: in person, via com - 
puters, or through their brokers. Everybody has a chance to buy and to sell. 
Each price is a momentary consensus of value of all market participants, 
expressed in action. Price is a psychological event - a momentary balance of 
opinion between bulls and bears. Prices are created by masses of traders- 
buyers, sellers, and undecided people. The patterns of prices and volume 
reflect the mass psychology of the markets. 
Behavior Patterns 
Huge crowds converge on stock, commodity, and option exchanges - either 
in person or represented by their brokers. Big money and little money, smart 
money and dumb money, institutional money and private money, all meet on 
the exchange floor. Each price represents a momentary consensus of value 
between buyers, sellers, and undecided traders at the moment of transaction. 
There 
is a crowd of traders behind every pattern in the chartbook. 
Crowd consensus changes from moment to moment. Sometimes it gets 
established in a very low -key environment, and at other times the environ- 
13. WHAT IS THE MARKET? 47 
ment turns wild. Prices move in small increments during quiet times. 
When a crowd becomes either spooked or elated, prices begin to jump. 
Imagine bidding for a life preserver aboard a sinking ship- that's how 
prices leap when masses of traders become emotional about a trend. An 
astute trader tries to enter the market during quiet times and take profits 
during wild times. 
Technical analysts study swings of mass psychology in the financial mar- 
kets. Each trading session is a battle between bulls, who make money when 
prices rise, and bears, who profit when prices fall. The goal of technical ana - 
lysts is to discover the balance of power between bulls and bears and bet on 
the winning group. If bulls are much stronger, you should buy and hold. If 
bears are much stronger, you should sell and sell short. If both camps are 
about equal in strength, a wise trader stands aside. He lets bullies fight with 
each other and puts on a trade only when he is reasonably sure who is likely 
to win. 
Prices, volume, and open interest reflect crowd behavior. So do the indica- 
tors that are based on them. This makes technical analysis similar to poll-tak- 
ing. Both combine science and art: They are scientific to the extent that we 
use statistical methods and computers; they are artistic to the extent that we 
use personal judgment to interpret our findings. 
