13. WHAT IS THE MARKET? 
What is the reality behind market symbols, prices, numbers, and graphs? 
When you check prices in your newspaper, watch quotes on your screen, or 
plot an indicator on your chart, what exactly are you looking at? What is the 
market that you want to analyze and trade? 
Amateurs act as if the market is a giant happening, a ball game in which 
they can join the professionals and make money. Traders from a scientific or 
engineering background often treat the market as a physical event. They 
apply to it the principles of signal processing, noise reduction, and similar 
ideas. By contrast, all professional traders know full well what the market 
is - it is a huge mass of people. 
Every trader tries to take money away from other traders by outguessing 
them on the probable direction of the market. The members of the market 
crowd live on different continents. They are united by modem telecommuni - 
cations in the pursuit of profit at each other's expense. The market is a huge 
crowd of people. Each member of the crowd tries to take money away from 
48 MASS PSYCHOLOGY 
other members by outsmarting them. The market is a uniquely harsh envi - 
ronment because everyone is against you, and you are against everyone. 
Not only is the market harsh, you have to pay high prices for entering and 
exiting it. You have to jump over two high barriers-commissions and slip- 
page - before you can collect a dime. The moment you place an order you 
owe your broker a commission - you are behind the game before you begin. 
Then floor traders try to hit you with slippage when your order arrives on the 
floor. They try to take another bite out of your account when you exit your 
trade. In trading, you compete against some of the brightest minds in the 
world while fending off the piranhas of commissions and slippage. 
Worldwide Crowds 
In the old days, markets were small and many traders knew one another. The 
New York Stock Exchange was formed in 1792 as a club of two dozen bro- 
kers. On sunny days they used to trade under a cottonwood tree and on rainy 
days in Fraunces Tavern. The first thing brokers did after they organized the 
New York Stock Exchange was to stick the public with fixed commissions 
that lasted for the next 180 years. 
Today, only floor traders meet face-to-face. Most of us are linked to the 
market electronically. Members of the financial crowd watch the same 
quotes on their terminals, read the same articles in the financial media, and 
get similar sales pitches from brokers. These links unite us as members of 
the market crowd even if we are thousands of miles away from the 
exchange. 
Thanks to modem telecommunications, the world is becoming smaller 
and the markets are growing. The euphoria of London flows to New York, 
and the gloom of Tokyo infects Hong Kong. 
When you analyze the market, you are analyzing crowd behavior. Crowds 
behave alike in different cultures on all continents. Social psychologists have 
uncovered several laws that govern crowd behavior. A trader needs to under- 
stand how market crowds influence his mind. 
Groups, Not Individuals 
Most people feel a strong urge to join the crowd and to "act like everybody 
else." This primitive urge clouds your judgment when you put on a trade. A 
13. WHAT IS THE MARKET? 49 
successful trader must think independently. He needs to be strong enough to 
analyze the market alone and to carry out his trading decisions. 
If eight or ten people place their hands on your head and push you down, 
your knees will buckle, no matter how strong you are. The crowd may be 
stupid, but it is stronger than you. Crowds have the power to create trends. 
Never buck a trend. If a trend is up, you should only buy or stand aside. 
Never sell short because "the prices are too high9'-never argue with the 
crowd. You do not have to run with the crowd-but you should never run 
against it. 
Respect the strength of the crowd - but do not fear it. Crowds are power - 
ful, but primitive, their behavior simple and repetitive. A trader who thinks 
for himself can take money from crowd members. 
The Source of Money 
When you try to make money trading, do you ever stop to wonder where 
your expected profits will come from? Is there money in the markets because 
of higher company earnings, or lower interest rates, or a good soybean crop? 
The only reason there is money in the markets is that other traders put it 
there. The money you want to make belongs to other people who have no 
intention of giving it to you. 
Trading means trying to rob other people while they are trying to rob you. 
It is a hard business. Winning is especially difficult because brokers and 
floor traders skim money from losers and winners alike. 
Tim Slater compared trading to a medieval battle. A man used to go on a 
battlefield with his sword and try to kill his opponent, who was trying to kill 
him at the same time. The winner took the loser's weapons, his chattels, and 
his wife, and sold his children into slavery. Now we trade on the exchanges 
instead of doing battle in an open field. When you take money away from a 
man, it is not that different from drawing his blood. He may lose his house, 
his chattels, and his wife, and his children may suffer. 
An optimistic friend of mine once snickered that there are plenty of poorly 
prepared people on the battlefield: "Ninety to ninety-five percent of the bro- 
kers don't know the first thing about research. They don't know what they're 
doing. We have the knowledge, and some poor people who do not have it are 
just giving the money away to charity." This theory sounds good, but it is 
wrong - there is no easy money in the market. 
There are plenty of dumb sheep waiting to be fleeced or slaughtered. The 
50 MASS PSYCHOLOGY 
sheep are easy -but if you want a piece of their meat, you've got to fight 
some very dangerous competitors. There are mean professionals: American 
gunslingers, English knights, German landsknechts, Japanese samurai, and 
other warriors, all going after the same hapless sheep. Trading means bat- 
tling crowds of hostile people while paying for the privilege of entering the 
battle and leaving it, whether dead, wounded, 
 or alive. 
Inside Information 
There is at least one group of people who consistently get information before 
other traders. Records show that corporate insiders consistently make profits 
in the stock market. Those records reflect legitimate trades that have been 
reported by insiders to the Securities and Exchange Commission. They rep- 
resent the tip of the iceberg - but there is a great deal of illegitimate insider 
trading in the stock market. 
People who trade on inside information are stealing money from the rest 
of us. The insider trials of the 1980s have landed some of the more notorious 
insiders in jail - Dennis Levine, Ivan Boesky, and others. For a while, hardly 
a week went by without an arrest, indictment, conviction or a consent 
decree: The Yuppy Five, Michael Milken, even a psychiatrist in Connecticut 
who traded after learning about a pending takeover from a patient. 
The defendants of the 1980s insider trials were caught because they 
became greedy and careless - and ran into a federal prosecutor in New York 
with major political ambitions. The tip of the iceberg has been shaved down, 
but its bulk continues to float. Do not ask whose ship it will hit-it is your 
trading account. 
Trying to reduce insider trading is like trying to get rid of rats on a farm: 
Pesticides keep them under control but do not root them out. A retired chief 
executive of a publicly traded firm explained to me that a smart man does 
not trade on inside information but gives it to his golfing buddies at a coun- 
try club. Later they give him inside information on their companies, and both 
profit without being detected. The insider network is safe as long as its mem- 
bers follow the same code of conduct and do not become too greedy. 
Insider trading is legal in the futures markets. Technical analysis helps 
you detect insider buying and selling. Charts reflect all trades by all market 
participants-even by the insiders. They leave their tracks on the charts just 
like everyone else - and it is your job as a technical analyst to follow them to 
the bank. 
14. THE TRADING SCENE 5 1 
