15. THE MARKET CROWD AND YOU 
The market is a loosely organized crowd whose members bet that prices will 
rise or fall. Since each price represents the consensus of the crowd at the 
moment of transaction, all traders are in effect betting on the future mood of 
the crowd. That crowd keeps swinging from indifference to optimism or pes- 
simism and from hope to fear. Most people do not follow their own trading 
plans because they let the crowd influence their feelings, thoughts, and 
actions. 
Bulls and bears battle in the market, and the value of your investment sinks 
or soars, depending on the actions of total strangers. You cannot control the 
markets. You can only decide whether and when to enter or exit trades. 
Most traders feel jittery when we enter a trade. Their judgment becomes 
clouded by emotions after they join the market crowd. These crowd-induced 
emotions make traders deviate from their trading plans and lose money. 
Experts on Crowds 
Charles Mackay, a Scottish barrister, wrote his classic book, Extraordinary 
Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds, in 1841. He described sev - 
eral mass manias, including the Tulip Mania in Holland in 1634 and the 
South Seas investment bubble in England in 1720. 
The tulip craze began as a bull market in tulip bulbs. The long bull market 
convinced the prosperous Dutch that tulips would continue to appreciate. 
Many of them abandoned their businesses to grow tulips, trade them, or 
15. THE MARKET CROWD AND YOU 57 
become tulip brokers. Banks accepted tulips as collateral and speculators 
profited. Finally, that mania collapsed in waves of panic selling, leaving 
many people destitute and the nation shocked. Mackay sighed, "Men go mad 
in crowds, and they come back to their senses slowly and one by one." 
In 1897, Gustave LeBon, a French philosopher and politician, wrote The 
Crowd, one of the best books on mass psychology. A trader who reads it 
today can see his reflection in a century-old mirror. 
LeBon wrote that when people gather in a crowd, "Whoever be the indi- 
viduals that compose it, however like or unlike be their mode of life, their 
occupations, their character, or their intelligence, the fact that they have been 
transformed into a crowd puts them in possession of a sort of collective mind 
which makes them feel, think, and act in a manner quite different from that 
in which each individual of them would feel, think, and act were he in a state 
of isolation." 
People change when they join crowds. They become more credulous and 
impulsive, anxiously search for a leader, and react to emotions instead of 
using their intellect. An individual who becomes involved in a group 
becomes less capable of thinking for himself. 
The experiments of American social psychologists in the 1950s have 
proven that people think differently in groups than they do alone. For exam - 
ple, an individual can easily tell which of the two lines on a piece of paper is 
longer. He loses that ability when he is put into a group whose other mem- 
bers deliberately give wrong answers. Intelligent, college-educated people 
believe a group of strangers more than they believe their own eyes! 
Group members believe others, and particularly group leaders, more than 
they believe themselves. Theodore Adorno and other sociologists showed in 
their two-volume study, The American Soldier, that the single best predictor 
of an individual's effectiveness in combat was his relationship with his 
sergeant. A soldier who trusts his leader will literally follow him to his death. 
A trader who believes he is following a trend may hold a losing position 
until his equity is wiped out. 
Sigmund Freud explained that groups are held together by the loyalty of 
members to the leader. Our feelings toward group leaders stem from our 
childhood feelings toward our fathers- a mixture of trust, awe, fear, the 
desire for approval, and potential rebellion. When we join groups, our think- 
ing on issues involving that group regresses to the level of a child. A leader- 
less group cannot hold itself together and falls apart. This explains buying 
and selling panics. When traders suddenly feel that the trend they have been 
following has abandoned them, they dump their positions in a panic. 
58 MASS PSYCHOLOGY 
Group members may catch a few trends, but they get killed when trends 
reverse. When you join a group, you act like a child following a parent. 
Markets do not care about your well-being. Successful traders are indepen- 
dent thinkers. 
Why Join? 
People have been joining crowds for safety since the beginning of time. If a 
group of hunters took on a saber -toothed tiger, most of them were likely to 
survive. A lone hunter had a slim chance of coming out alive from such an 
encounter. Loners got killed more often and left fewer offspring. Group 
members were more likely to survive, and the tendency to join groups 
appears to have been bred into humans. 
Our society glorifies freedom and free will, but we carry many primitive 
impulses beneath the thin veneer of civilization. We want to join groups for 
safety and be led by strong leaders. The greater the uncertainty, the stronger 
our wish to join and to follow. 
No saber-toothed tigers roam the canyons of Wall Street, but you probably 
fear for your financial survival. Your fear swells up because you cannot con - 
trol changes in prices. The value of your position rises and falls because of 
buying and selling by total strangers. This uncertainty makes most traders 
look for a leader who will tell them what to do. 
You may have rationally decided to go long or short, but the moment you 
put on a trade, the crowd starts sucking you in. You need to pay attention to 
several signs that indicate when you start turning into a sweaty crowd mem- 
ber instead of an intelligent trader. 
You start losing your independence when you watch prices like a hawk 
and feel elated if they go your way or depressed if they go against you. You 
are in trouble when you start trusting gurus more than yourself and impul - 
sively add to losing positions or reverse them. You lose your independence 
when you do not follow your own trading plan. When you notice what is 
happening, try to come back to your senses; if you cannot regain your com - 
posure, exit your trade. 
Crowd Mentality 
People become primitive and action-oriented when they join crowds. 
Crowds feel simple but strong emotions such as terror, elation, alarm, and 
joy. Crowds swing from fear to glee, from panic to mirth. A scientist can be 
15. THE MARKET CROWD AND YOU 59 
cool and rational in his lab but make harebrained trades after being swept 
up in the mass hysteria of the market. A group can suck you in, whether you 
trade from a crowded brokerage office or from a remote mountaintop. 
When you let others influence your trading decisions, you lose your chance 
of success. 
Group loyalty is essential for the survival of a military unit. Joining a 
union can help you keep a job even if your performance is not very good. 
But no group can protect you in the market. 
The crowd is bigger and stronger than you. No matter how smart you are, 
you cannot argue with the crowd. You have only one choice- to join the 
crowd or to act independently. 
Many traders are puzzled why markets always seem to reverse immedi- 
ately after they dump their losing position. This happens because crowd 
members are gripped by the same fear-and everybody dumps at the same 
time. Once the fit of selling has ended, the market has nowhere to go but up. 
Optimism returns to the marketplace, and the crowd feels greedy and goes 
on a new buying binge. 
Crowds are primitive, and your trading strategies should be simple. You 
do not have to be a rocket scientist to design a winning trading method. If the 
trade goes against you-cut your losses and run. It never pays to argue with 
the crowd-simply use your judgment to decide when to join and when to 
leave. 
Your human nature prepares you to give up your independence under 
stress. When you put on a trade, you feel the desire to imitate others and 
overlook objective trading signals. This is why you need to develop and fol- 
low trading systems and money management rules. They represent your 
rational individual decisions, made before you enter a trade and become a 
crowd member. 
Who Leads? 
You may feel intense joy when prices move in your favor. You may feel 
angry, depressed, and fearful when prices go against you, and you may anx- 
iously wait to see what the market will do to you next. Traders join crowds 
when they feel stressed or threatened. Battered by emotions, they lose their 
independence and begin imitating other group members, especially the group 
leader. 
When children feel frightened, they want to be told what to do and look 
up to their parents. They transfer that attitude to teachers, doctors, ministers, 
60 MASS PSYCHOLOGY 
bosses, and assorted experts. Traders turn to gums, trading system vendors, 
newspaper columnists, and other market leaders. But, as Tony Plummer bril - 
liantly pointed out in his book, Forecasting Financial Markets, the main 
leader of the market is price. 
Price 
is the leader of the market crowd. Traders all over the world follow 
the market's upticks and downticks. Price seems to say to traders, "Follow 
me, and I will show you the way to riches. " Most traders consider them- 
selves independent. Few of us realize how strongly we focus on the behavior 
of our group leader. 
A trend that goes in your favor symbolizes a strong, bountiful parent call - 
ing you to share a meal or risk being left out. A trend that goes against you 
symbolizes an angry, punishing parent. When you are gripped by these feel- 
ings, it is easy to overlook objective signals that tell you to exit. You may 
feel defiant, or bargain, or beg forgiveness -while avoiding the rational act 
of accepting your loss and getting out of a losing position. 
Independence 
You need to base your trades on a carefully prepared trading plan and not 
jump in response to price changes. It pays to write down your plan. You need 
to know exactly under what conditions you will enter and exit a trade. Do 
not make decisions on the spur of the moment, when you are vulnerable to 
being sucked into the crowd. 
You can succeed in trading only when you think and act as an individual. 
The weakest part of any trading system is the trader himself. Traders fail when 
they trade without a plan or deviate from their plans. Plans are created by rea- 
soning individuals. Impulsive trades are made by sweaty group members. 
You have to observe yourself and notice changes in your mental state as 
you trade. Write down your reasons for entering a trade and the rules for 
getting out of it, including money management rules. You must not change 
your plan while you have an open position. 
Sirens were sea creatures of Greek myths who sang so beautifully that 
sailors jumped overboard and drowned. When Odysseus wanted to hear the 
Sirens' songs, he ordered his men to tie him to the mast and to put wax in 
their own ears. Odysseus heard the Sirens' song but survived because he 
could not jump. You ensure your survival as a trader when on a clear day 
you tie yourself to the mast of a trading plan and money management rules. 
16. PSYCHOLOGY OF TRENDS 6 1 
