17. MANAGING VERSUS FORECASTING 
I once ran into a very fat surgeon at a seminar. He told me that he had lost a 
quarter of a million dollars in three years trading stocks and options. When I 
asked him how he made his trading decisions, he sheepishly pointed to his 
ample gut. He gambled on hunches and used his professional income to sup- 
port his habit. There are two alternatives to "gut feel": One is fundamental 
analysis; the other is technical analysis. 
Major bull and bear markets result from fundamental changes in supply 
and demand. Fundamental analysts follow crop reports, study the actions , 
of the Federal Reserve, track industry utilization rates, and so on. Even if 
you know those factors, you can lose money trading if you are out of touch 
with intermediate - and short -term trends. They depend on the crowd's 
emotions. 
Technical analysts believe that prices reflect everything known about the 
market, including all fundamental factors. Each price represents the consen- 
sus of value of all market participants - large commercial interests and small 
speculators, fundamental researchers, technicians, and gamblers. 
Technical analysis is a study of mass psychology. It is partly a science and 
partly an art. Technicians use many scientific methods, including mathemati - 
cal concepts of game theory, probabilities, and so on. Many technicians use 
computers to track sophisticated indicators. 
Technical analysis is also an art. The bars on a chart coalesce into patterns 
and formations. When prices and indicators move, they produce a sense of 
flow and rhythm, a feeling of tension and beauty that helps you sense what is 
happening and how to trade. 
Individual behavior is complex, diverse, and difficult to predict. Group 
behavior is primitive. Technicians study the behavior patterns of market 
crowds. They trade when they recognize a pattern that preceded past market 
moves. 
MASS PSYCHOLOGY 
Poll-Taking 
Political poll -taking is a good model of technical analysis. Technicians and 
polltakers try to read the mass mind. Polltakers do it for political gain, tech- 
nicians for financial gain. Politicians want to know their chances of being 
elected or re-elected. They make promises to constituents and then ask poll- 
takers about their odds of winning. 
Polltakers use scientific methods: statistics, sampling procedures, and so 
on. They also need a flair for interviewing and phrasing questions; they 
have to be plugged into the emotional undercurrents of their party. Poll-tak- 
ing is a combination of science and art. If a polltaker says he is a scientist, 
ask him why every major political polltaker in the United States is affiliated 
with either the Democratic or Republican party. True science knows no 
party. 
A market technician must rise above party affiliation. Be neither a bull 
nor a bear, but only seek the truth. A biased bull looks at a chart and says, 
"Where can I buy?" A biased bear looks at the same chart and tries to find 
where he can go short. A top-flight analyst is free of bullish or bearish bias. 
There is a trick to help you detect your bias. If you want to buy, turn your 
chart upside down and see whether it looks like a sell. If it still looks like a 
buy after you flip it, then you have to work on getting a bullish bias out of 
your system. If both charts look like a sell, then you have to work on purging 
a bearish bias. 
A Crystal Ball 
Most traders take price swings personally. They feel very proud when they 
make money and love to talk about their profits. When a trade goes against 
them they feel like punished children and try to keep their losses secret. You 
can read traders' emotions on their faces. 
Many traders believe that the aim of a market analyst is to forecast future 
prices. The amateurs in most fields ask for forecasts, while professionals 
simply manage information and make decisions based on probabilities. Take 
medicine, for example. A patient is brought to an emergency room with a 
knife sticking out of his chest-and the anxious family members have only 
two questions: "Will he survive? " and "when can he go home?" They ask the 
doctor for a forecast. 
17. MANAGING VERSUS FORECASTING 67 
But the doctor is not forecasting- he is taking care of problems as they 
emerge. His first job is to prevent the patient from dying from shock, and so 
he gives him pain-killers and starts an intravenous drip to replace lost 
blood. Then he removes the knife and sutures damaged organs. After that, 
he has to watch against infection. He monitors the trend of a patient's health 
and takes measures to prevent complications. He is managing- not fore- 
casting. When a family begs for a forecast, he may give it to them, but its 
practical value is low. 
To make money trading, you do not need to forecast the future. You have 
to extract information from the market and find out whether bulls or bears 
are in control. You need to measure the strength of the dominant market 
group and decide how likely the current trend is to continue. You need to 
practice conservative money management aimed at long -term survival and 
profit accumulation. You must observe how your mind works and avoid slip - 
ping into greed or fear. A trader who does all of this will succeed more than 
any forecaster. 
Read the Market, Manage Yourself 
A tremendous volume of information pours out of the markets during trading 
hours. Changes in prices tell us about the battles of bulls and bears. Your job 
is to analyze this information and bet on the dominant market group. 
Dramatic forecasts are a marketing gimmick. People who sell advisory 
services or raise money know that good calls attract paying customers, while 
bad calls are quickly forgotten. My phone rang while I was writing this chap 
ter. One of the famous gurus, currently down on his luck, told me that he 
identified a "once-in-a-lifetime buying opportunity " in a certain agricultural 
market. He asked me to raise money for him and promised to multiply it a 
hundredfold in six months! I do not know how many fools he hooked, but 
dramatic forecasts have always been good for fleecing the public. 
Use your common sense when you analyze markets. When some new 
development puzzles you, compare it to life outside the markets. For exam- 
ple, indicators may give you buy signals in two markets. Should you buy 
the market that declined a lot before the buy signal or the one that declined 
a little? Compare this to what happens to a man after a fall. If he falls down 
a flight of stairs, he may dust himself off and run up again. But if he falls 
out of a third story window, he's not going to run anytime soon; he needs 
68 MASS PSYCHOLOGY 
time to recover. Prices seldom rally very hard immediately after a bad 
decline. 
Successful trading stands on three pillars. You need to analyze the bal- 
ance of power between bulls and bears. You need to practice good money 
management. You need personal discipline to follow your trading plan and 
avoid getting high in the markets. 
111 
Classical Chart Analysis 
