18. CHARTING 
Chartists study market action, trying to identify recurrent price patterns. 
Their goal is to profit from trading when patterns recur. Most chartists work 
with bar graphs showing high, low, and closing prices and volume. Some 
also watch opening prices and open interest. Point -and-figure chartists track 
only price changes and ignore time, volume, and open interest. 
Classical charting requires only a pencil and paper. It appeals to visually 
oriented people. Those who plot data by hand often develop a physical feel 
for prices. Computers speed charting at a cost of losing some of that feel. 
The biggest problem in charting is wishful thinking. Traders often con- 
vince themselves that a pattern is bullish or bearish depending on whether 
they want to buy or to sell. 
Early in this century Herman Rorschach, a Swiss psychiatrist, designed a 
test for exploring a person's mind. He dropped ink on 10 sheets of paper and 
folded each in half, creating a symmetrical inkblot. Most people who peer at 
these sheets describe what they see: parts of the anatomy, animals, buildings, 
and so on. In reality, there are only inkblots! Each person sees what's on his 
mind. Most traders use charts as a giant Rorschach test. They project their 
hopes, fears, and fantasies onto the charts. 
Brief History 
The first chartists in the United States appeared at the turn of the century. 
They included Charles Dow, the author of a famous stock market theory, and 
70 CLASSICAL CHART ANALYSIS 
William Hamilton, who succeeded Dow as the editor of the Wall Street 
Journal. Dow's famous maxim was "The averages discount everything. " He 
meant that changes in the Dow Jones Industrial and Rail Averages reflected 
all knowledge and hopes about the economy and the stock market. 
Dow never wrote a book, only the Wall Street Journal editorials. 
Hamilton took over the job after Dow died and struck a blow for charting 
when he wrote "The Turn of the Tide," an editorial following the 1929 crash. 
Hamilton laid out the principles of Dow theory in his book, The Stock 
Market Barometer. Robert Rhea, a newsletter publisher, brought the theory 
to its pinnacle in his 1932 book, The Dow Theory. 
The decade of the 1930s was the Golden Age of charting. Many innovators 
found themselves with time on their hands after the crash of 1929. Schabaker, 
Rhea, Elliott, Wyckoff, Gann, and others published their research during that 
decade. Their work went in two distinct directions. Some, such as Wyckoff 
and Schabaker, saw charts as a graphic record of supply and demand in the 
markets. Others, such as Elliott and Gann, searched for a perfect order in the 
markets- a fascinating but futile undertaking (see Section 6). 
In 1948, Edwards (who was a son-in-law of Schabaker) and Magee pub- 
lished Technical Analysis of Stock Trends. They popularized such concepts 
as triangles, rectangles, head -and-shoulders, and other chart formations, as 
well as support and resistance and trendlines. Other chartists have applied 
these concepts to commodities. 
Markets have changed a great deal since the days of Edwards and Magee. 
In the 1940s, daily volume of an active stock on the New York Stock 
Exchange was only several hundred shares, while in the 1990s it often 
exceeds a million. The balance of power in the stock market has shifted in 
favor of bulls. Early chartists wrote that stock market tops were sharp and 
fast, while bottoms took a long time to develop. That was true in their defla - 
tionary era, but the opposite has been true since the 1950s. Now bottoms 
tend to form quickly while tops tend to take longer. 
The Meaning of a Bar Chart 
Chart patterns reflect the tides of greed and fear among traders. This book 
focuses on daily charts, but you can apply many of its principles to other 
data. The rules for reading weekly, daily, hourly, or intraday charts are very 
similar. 
Each price is a momentary consensus of value of all market participants 
18. CHARTING 71 
expressed in action. Each price bar provides several pieces of information 
about the balance of power between bulls and bears (Figure 18-1). 
The opening price of a daily or a weekly bar usually reflects the ama- 
teurs' opinion of value. They read morning papers, find out what happened 
the day before, and call their brokers with orders before going to work. 
Amateurs are especially active early in the day and early in the week. 
Traders who researched the relationship between opening and closing prices 
for several decades found that opening prices most often occur near the high or 
the low of the daily bars. Buying or selling by amateurs early in the day creates 
an emotional extreme from which prices recoil later in the day. 
In bull markets, prices often make their low for the week on Monday or , 
s&p500 
1 
I , I ' 
'1 
11' 
I .. 
IItII 'I 
nu! 
Figure 18-1. The Meaning of a Bar Chart 
Opening prices are set by amateurs, whose orders accumulate overnight 
and hit the market in the morning. Closing prices are largely set by mar- 
ket professionals, who trade throughout the day. Note how often open- 
ing and closing prices are at opposite ends of a bar. 
The high of each bar marks the maximum power of bulls during that 
bar. The low of each bar marks the maximum power of bears during that 
bar. Slippage tends to be less when you enter or exit positions during 
short bars. .L 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
7 Professionals (dose) 
Max power of bean (low) 399.00 
396,. 
393.. 
398,W 
381,W 
384,88 
381,88 
318.88 
315,W 
372188 , 
T 
72 CLASSICAL CHART ANALYSIS 
Tuesday on profit taking by amateurs, then rally to a new high on Thursday 
or Friday. In bear markets, the high for the week is often set on Monday or 
Tuesday, with a new low toward the end of the week, on Thursday or Friday. 
The closing prices of daily and weekly bars tend to reflect the actions of 
professional traders. They watch the markets throughout the day, respond to 
changes, and become especially active near the close. Many of them take 
profits at that time to avoid carrying trades overnight. 
Professionals as a group usually trade against the amateurs. They tend to 
buy lower openings, sell short higher openings, and unwind their positions as 
the day goes on. Traders need to pay attention to the relationship between 
opening and closing prices. If prices closed higher than they opened, then 
market professionals were probably more bullish than amateurs. If prices 
closed lower than they opened, then market professionals were probably 
more bearish than amateurs. It pays to trade with the professionals and 
against the amateurs. 
The high of each bar represents the maximum power of bulls during that 
bar. Bulls make money when prices go up. Their buying pushes prices 
higher, and every uptick adds to their profits. Finally, bulls reach a point 
where they cannot lift prices - not even by one more tick. The high of a daily 
bar represents the maximum power of bulls during the day, and the high of a 
weekly bar marks the maximum power of bulls during the week; the high of 
a 5-minute bar reflects the maximum power of bulls during that 5-minute 
period. The highest point of a bar represents the maximum power of bulls 
during that bar. 
The low of each bar represents the maximum power of bears during that 
bar. Bears make money when prices go down. They keep selling short, their 
selling pushes prices lower, and every downtick adds to their profits. At 
some point they run out of either capital or enthusiasm, and prices stop 
falling. The low of each bar shows the maximum power of bears during that 
bar. The low of a daily bar marks the maximum power of bears during that 
day, and the low of a weekly bar identifies the maximum power of bears dur - 
ing that week. 
The closing tick of each bar reveals the outcome of a battle between 
bulls and bears during that bar. If prices close near the high of the daily bar, 
it shows that bulls won the day's battle. If prices close near the low of the 
day, it shows that bears won the day. Closing prices on daily charts of the 
futures markets are especially important. The amount of money in your 
account depends on them because your account equity is "marked to market" 
each night. 
The distance between the high and the low of any bar reveals the inten- 
18. CHARTING 73 
sity of conflict between bulls and bears. An average bar marks a relatively 
cool market. A bar that is only half as long as average reveals a sleepy, disin- 
terested market. A bar that is two times taller than average shows a boiling 
market where bulls and bears battle all over the field. 
Slippage (see Section 3) is usually lower in quiet markets. It pays to enter 
your trades during short or normal bars. Tall bars are good for taking profits. 
Trying to put on a position when the market is running is like jumping on a 
moving train. It is better to wait for the next one. 
Japanese Candlesticks 
Japanese rice traders began using candlestick charts some two centuries 
before the first chartists appeared in America. Instead of bars, these charts 
have rows of candles with wicks at both ends. The body of each candle rep 
resents the distance between the opening and closing prices. If the closing 
price is higher than the opening, the body is white. If the closing price is 
lower, the body is black. 
The tip of the upper wick represents the high of the day, and the bottom of 
the lower wick represents the low of the day. The Japanese consider highs and 
lows relatively unimportant, according to Steve Nison, author of Japanese 
Candlestick Charting Techniques. They focus on the relationship between 
opening and closing prices and on patterns that include several candles. 
The main advantage of a candlestick chart is its focus on the struggle 
between amateurs who control openings and professionals who control clos - 
ings. Unfortunately, most candlestick chartists fail to use many tools of 
Westem analysts. They ignore volume and have no trendlines or technical 
indicators. These gaps are being filled by modem American analysts such as 
Greg Morris, whose Candlepower software combines Western technical 
indicators with classical candlestick patterns. 
Market Profile 
This charting technique for tracking accumulation and distribution during 
each trading session was developed by J. Peter Steidlmayer. Market Profile 
requires access to real-time data-a constant flow of quotes throughout the 
day. It assigns one letter of the alphabet to each half-hour of trading. Each 
price level reached during that half-hour is marked with its own letter. 
As prices change, more and more letters fill the screen, creating a bell- 
74 CLASSICAL CHART ANALYSIS 
shaped curve. When prices erupt in a trend, Market Profile reflects that by 
becoming elongated. Market Profile is sometimes combined with Liquidity 
Data Bank. It tracks intraday volume of trading by several groups-floor 
traders, hedgers, and off -the-floor traders. 
Efficient Markets, Random Walk, and Nature's Law 
Efficient Market tbeory is an academic notion that nobody can outperform 
the market because any price at any given moment incorporates all available 
information. Warren Buffet, one of the most successful investors of our cen- 
tury, commented: "I think it's fascinating how the ruling orthodoxy can 
cause a lot of people to think the earth is flat. Investing in a market where 
people believe in efficiency is like playing bridge with someone who's been 
told it doesn't do any good to look at the cards." 
The logical flaw of Efficient Market theory is that it equates knowledge 
with action. People may have knowledge, but the emotional pull of the 
crowd often leads them to trade irrationally. A good analyst can detect repet - 
itive patterns of crowd behavior on his charts and exploit them. 
Random Walk theorists claim that market prices change at random. Of 
course, there is a fair amount of randomness or "noise" in the markets, just 
as there is randomness in any other crowd milling around. An intelligent 
observer can identify repetitive behavior patterns of a crowd and make sensi- 
ble bets on their continuation or reversal. 
People have memories, 
 they remember past prices, and their memories 
influence their buying and selling decisions. Memories help create support 
under the market and resistance above it. Random Walkers deny that memo - 
ries of the past influence our behavior in the present. 
As Milton Friedman has pointed out, prices carry information about the 
availability of supply and the intensity of demand. Market participants use 
that information to make their buying and selling decisions. For example, 
consumers buy more merchandise when it is on sale and less when prices are 
high. Financial traders are just as capable of logical behavior as homemakers 
in a supermarket. When prices are low, bargain hunters step in. A shortage 
can lead to a buying panic, but high prices choke off demand. 
Nature's Law is the rallying cry of a clutch of mystics who oppose 
Random Walkers in the financial markets. Mystics claim that there is a per- 
fect order in the markets, which they say move like clockwork in response to 
immutable natural laws. R. N. Elliott even titled his last book Nature's Law. 
19. SUPPORT AND RESISTANCE 75 
The "perfect order " crowd gravitates to astrology and looks for links 
between prices and the movements of the planets. Most mystics try to hide 
their astrological bent, but it is easy to draw them out of a shell. Next time 
someone talks to you about natural order in the markets, ask him about 
astrology. He will probably jump at the chance to come out of the closet and 
talk about the stars. 
Those who believe in perfect order in the markets accept that tops and 
bottoms can be predicted far into the future. Amateurs love forecasts, and 
mysticism provides a great marketing gimmick. It helps sell courses, trading 
systems, and newsletters. 
Mystics, Random Walk academics, and Efficient Market theorists have 
one trait in common. They are equally divorced from the reality of the mar- 
kets. Extremists argue with one another but they think alike. 
