19. SUPPORT AND RESISTANCE 
A ball hits the floor and bounces. It drops after it hits the ceiling. Support 
and resistance are like a floor and a ceiling, with prices sandwiched between 
them. Understanding support and resistance is essential for understanding 
price trends and chart patterns. Rating their strength helps you decide 
whether the trend is likely to continue or to reverse. 
Support is a price level where buying is strong enough to interrupt or 
reverse a downtrend. When a downtrend hits support, it bounces like a 
diver who hits the bottom and pushes away from it. Support is represented 
on a chart by a horizontal or near -horizontal line connecting several bot - 
toms (Figure 19-1). 
Resistance is a price level where selling is strong enough to interrupt or 
reverse an uptrend. When an uptrend hits resistance, it stops or tumbles 
down like a man who hits his head on a branch while climbing a tree. 
Resistance is represented on a chart by a horizontal or near-horizontal line 
connecting several tops. 
It is better to draw support and resistance lines across the edges of conges- 
tion areas instead of extreme prices. The edges show where masses of traders 
have changed their minds, while the extreme points reflect only panic among 
the weakest traders. 
Minor support or resistance causes trends to pause, while major support or 
resistance causes them to reverse. Traders buy at support and sell at resis- 
tance, making their effectiveness a self -fulfilling prophecy. 
76 CLASSICAL CHART ANALYSIS 
British Pound 
Figure 19-1. Support and Resistance 
Draw horizontal lines through the upper and lower edges of congestion 
areas. The bottom line marks the support -the level at which buyers over- 
power sellers. The upper line identifies resistance, where sellers over- 
power buyers. Areas of support and resistance often switch their roles. 
Note how the level of support in March became the line of resistance in 
May. The strength of these barriers increases each time prices touch 
them and bounce away. 
Beware of false breakouts from support and resistance. The letter F 
marks false breakouts on this chart. Amateurs tend to follow breakouts, 
while professionals tend to fade (trade against) them. At the right edge of 
the chart, prices are hitting strong resistance. This is the time to look for 
a shorting opportunity, with a protective stop slightly above the line of 
resistance. 
Memories, Pain, and Regret 
Support and resistance exist because people have memories. Our memories 
prompt us to buy and sell at certain levels. Buying and selling by crowds of 
traders creates support and resistance. 
If traders remember that prices have recently stopped falling and turned 
up from a certain level, they are likely to buy when prices approach that 
19. SUPPORT AND RESISTANCE 
level again. If traders remember that an uptrend has recently reversed after 
rising to a certain peak, they tend to sell and go short when prices approach 
that level again. 
For example, all major rallies in the stock market from 1966 until 1982 
ended whenever the Dow Jones Industrial Average rallied to 950 or 1050. 
The resistance was so strong that traders named it "A Graveyard in the Sky." 
Once the bulls rammed the market through that level, it became a major sup 
port area. 
Support and resistance exist because masses of traders feel pain and 
regret. Traders who hold losing positions feel intense pain. Losers are deter- 
mined to get out as soon as the market gives them another chance. Traders 
who missed an opportunity feel regret and also wait for the market to give 
them a second chance. Feelings of pain and regret are mild in trading ranges 
where swings are small and losers do not get hurt too badly. Breakouts from 
trading ranges create intense pain and regret. 
When the market stays flat for a while, traders get used to buying at the 
lower edge of the range and shorting at the upper edge. In uptrends, bears 
who sold short feel pain and bulls feel regret that they did not buy more. 
Both feel determined to buy if the market gives them a second chance. The 
pain of bears and regret of bulls make them ready to buy, creating support 
during reactions in an uptrend. 
Resistance is an area where bulls feel pain, bears feel regret, and both are 
ready to sell. When prices break down from a trading range, bulls who 
bought feel pain, feel trapped, and wait for a rally to let them get out even. 
Bears regret that they have not shorted more and wait for a rally to give them 
a second chance to sell short. Bulls7 pain and bears7 regret create resis- 
tance- a ceiling above the market in downtrends. The strength of support 
and resistance depends on the strength of feelings among masses of traders. 
Strength of Support and Resistance 
A congestion area that has been hit by several trends is like a cratered battle- 
field. Its defenders have plenty of cover, and an attacking force is likely to 
slow down. The longer prices stay in a congestion zone, the stronger the 
emotional commitment of bulls and bears to that area. When prices approach 
that zone from above, it serves as support. When prices rally into it from 
below, it acts as resistance. A congestion area can reverse its role and serve 
as either support or resistance. 
CLASSICAL CHART ANALYSIS 
The strength of every support or resistance zone depends on three factors: 
its length, its height, and the volume of trading that has taken place in it. You 
can visualize these factors as the length, the width, and the depth of a con - 
gestion zone. 
The longer a support or resistance area - its length of time or the number 
of hits it took-the stronger it is. Support and resistance, like good wine, 
become better with age. A 2 -week trading range provides only minimal sup - 
port or resistance, a 2 -month range gives people time to become used to it 
and creates intermediate support or resistance, while a 2 -year range becomes 
accepted as a standard of value and offers major support or resistance. 
As support and resistance levels grow old, they gradually become weaker. 
Losers keep washing out of the markets, replaced by newcomers who do not 
have the same emotional commitment to old price levels. People who lost 
money only recently remember full well what happened to them. They are 
probably still in the market, feeling pain and regret, trying to get even. 
People who made bad decisions several years ago are probably out of the 
markets and their memories matter less. 
The strength of support and resistance increases each time that area is hit. 
When traders see that prices have reversed at a certain level, they tend to bet 
on a reversal the next time prices reach that level. 
The taller the support and resistance zone, the stronger it is. A tall con - 
gestion zone is like a tall fence around a property. A congestion zone whose 
height equals 1 percent of current market value (four points in the case of the 
S&P 500 at 400) provides only minor support or resistance. A congestion 
zone that is 3 percent tall provides intermediate support or resistance, and a 
congestion zone that is 7 percent tall or higher can grind down a major trend. 
The greater the volume of trading in a support and resistance zone, the 
stronger it is. High volume in a congestion area shows active involvement 
by traders - a sign of strong emotional commitment. Low volume shows that 
traders have little interest in transacting at that level - a sign of weak support 
or resistance. 
1. Whenever the trend you are riding approaches support or resistance, 
tighten your .protective stop. A protective stop is an order to sell below 
the market when you are long or to cover shorts above the market 
when you are short. This stop protects you from getting badly hurt by 
19. SUPPORT AND RESISTANCE 
an adverse market move. A trend reveals its health by how it acts 
when it hits support or resistance. If it is strong enough to penetrate 
that zone, it accelerates, and your tight stop is not touched. If a trend 
bounces away from support or resistance, it reveals its weakness. In 
that case, your tight stop salvages a good chunk of profits. 
2. Support and resistance are more important on long-term charts than on 
short-term charts. Weekly charts are more important than dailies. A 
good trader keeps an eye on several timeframes and defers to the 
longer one. If the weekly trend is sailing through a clear zone, the fact 
that the daily trend is hitting resistance is less important. When a 
weekly trend approaches support or resistance, you should be more 
inclined to act. 
3. Support and resistance levels are useful for placing stop -loss and pro- 
tect-profit orders. The bottom of a congestion area is the bottom line 
of support. If you buy and place your stop below that level, you give 
the uptrend plenty of room. More cautious traders buy after an upside 
breakout and place a stop in the middle of a congestion area. A true 
upside breakout should not be followed by a pullback into the range, 
just as a rocket is not supposed to sink back to its launching pad. 
Reverse this procedure in downtrends. 
Many traders avoid placing stops at round numbers. This superstition 
began with off -the-cuff advice by Edwards and Magee to avoid placing stops 
at round numbers because "everybody" was placing them there. Now, if 
traders buy copper at 92, they place a stop at 89.75 rather than 90. When 
they sell a stock short at 76, they place a protective stop at 80.25 rather than 
80. These days there are fewer stops at round numbers than at fractional 
numbers. It is better to place your stops at logical levels, round or not. 
Markets spend more time in trading ranges than they do in trends. Most 
breakouts from trading ranges are false breakouts. They suck in trend-fol- 
lowers just before prices return into the trading range. A false breakout is the 
bane of amateurs, but professional traders love them. 
Professionals expect prices to fluctuate without going very far most of the 
time. They wait until an upside breakout stops reaching new highs or a 
80 CLASSICAL CHART ANALYSIS 
downside breakout stops making new lows. Then they pounce - they fade 
the breakout (trade against it) and place a protective stop at the latest 
extreme point. It is a very tight stop, and their risk is low, while there is a big 
profit potential from a pullback into the congestion zone. The riswreward 
ratio is so good that professionals can afford to be wrong half the time and 
still come out ahead of the game. 
The best time to buy an upside breakout on a daily chart is when your 
analysis of the weekly chart suggests that a new uptrend is developing. True 
breakouts are confirmed by heavy volume, while false breakouts tend to 
have light volume. 
 True breakouts are confirmed when technical indicators 
reach new extreme highs or lows in the direction of the trend, while false 
breakouts are often marked by divergences between prices and indicators. 
