2. PSYCHOLOGY IS THE KEY 
You may base your trades on fundamental or technical analysis. You may 
trade because of hunches about economic and political trends, use "inside 
information, " or simply hope. 
Remember how you felt the last time you placed an order? Were you anx- 
ious to jump in or afraid of losing? Did you procrastinate before picking up 
the phone? When you closed out a trade, did you feel elated or humiliated? 
The feelings of thousands of traders merge into huge psychological tides that 
move the markets. 
Getting Off the Roller Coaster 
The majority of traders spend most of their time looking for good trades. 
Once they enter a trade, they lose control and either squirm from pain or grin 
from pleasure. They ride an emotional roller coaster and miss the essential 
element of winning-the management of their emotions. Their inability to 
manage themselves leads to poor money management of their accounts. 
If your mind is not in gear with the markets, or if you ignore changes in 
mass psychology of crowds, then you have no chance of making money 
trading. All winning professionals know the enormous importance of psy- 
chology in trading. All losing amateurs ignore it. 
Friends and clients who know that I am a psychiatrist often ask me 
4 INTRODUCTION 
whether this helps me as a trader. Good psychiatry and good trading have 
one important principle in common. Both focus on reality, on seeing the 
world the way it is. To live a healthy life, you have to live with your eyes 
open. To be a good trader, you need to trade with your eyes open, recognize 
real trends and turns, and not waste time or energy on regrets and wishful 
thinking. 
A Man's Came? 
Brokerage house records show that most traders are male. The files of my 
educational firm, Financial Trading Seminars, Inc., confirm that approxi- 
mately 95 percent of traders are men. For this reason, you'll find that I com - 
monly use the masculine pronoun (he) in the anecdotes and cases throughout 
this book. Of course, no disrespect is intended to the many successful 
women traders. 
The percentage of women is higher among institutional traders - employ- 
ees of banks, trading firms, and the like. In my experience, however, the few 
women who get involved in trading succeed more often than men. A woman 
needs exceptional drive to plunge into this male preserve. 
Trading is similar to such thrilling and dangerous sports as sky-diving, 
rock-climbing, and scuba-diving. They also attract mostly men - fewer than 
1 percent of hang gliders are female. 
Men are drawn to risky sports in our increasingly regulated society. Dr. 
David Klein, a sociologist at the University of Michigan, was quoted in the 
New York Times as saying, "as work becomes more and more routinized . . . 
we turn to recreation for a sense of accomplishment. The safer and more rou- 
tine we make work, the more we will push people into recreations where 
individual distinction and discretion, adventure and excitement play a part." 
These sports provide intense pleasure but have a stigma of danger because 
many participants ignore the risks and take thoughtless chances. Dr. John 
Tongue, an orthopedic surgeon in Oregon who studied accidents among hang 
gliders, found that the chance of death rises among more experienced pilots 
because they take greater risks. An athlete who wants to enjoy risky sports 
has to follow safety rules. When you reduce risks, you gain an added sense 
of accomplishment and control. The same goes for trading. 
You can succeed in trading only if you handle it as a serious intellectual 
pursuit. Emotional trading is lethal. To help ensure success, practice defen - 
sive money management. A good trader watches his capital as carefully as a 
professional scuba diver watches his air supply. 
2. PSYCHOLOGY IS THE KEY 
How This Book Is Organized , 
\ 
Successful trading stands on three pillars: psychology, market analysis and'\\ 
trading systems, and money management. This book will help you explore 
all three. 
The first chapter of this book shows you a new approach to managing 
your emotions as a trader. I discovered this method while practicing psychia - 
try. It has greatly improved my trading, and it can help you, too. 
The second chapter describes the crowd psychology of markets. Mass 
behavior is more primitive than individual behavior. If you understand how 
crowds behave, then you can profit from their mood swings and avoid being 
swept up in their emotions. 
The third chapter of the book shows how chart patterns reveal crowd 
behavior. Classical technical analysis is applied social psychology, like poll- 
taking. Trendlines, gaps, and other chart patterns actually reflect crowd 
behavior. 
The fourth chapter teaches modern methods of computerized technical 
analysis. Indicators provide a deeper insight into mass psychology than clas - 
sical technical analysis. Trend -following indicators help identify market 
trends, while oscillators show when trends are ready to reverse. 
Volume and open interest also reflect crowd behavior. The fifth chapter 
focuses on them as well as on the passage of time in the markets. Crowds 
have a very short attention span, and a trader who relates price changes to 
time gains a competitive advantage. 
The sixth chapter focuses on the best techniques of stock market analysts. 
They can be especially helpful for stock index futures and options traders. 
Sentiment indicators measuring the opinions of investors and traders are 
profiled in the seventh chapter. Crowds follow trends, and it often pays to 
join them when prices are moving. Sentiment indicators show when it is time 
to abandon the crowd - before it misses an important reversal. 
The eighth chapter reveals two proprietary indicators. Elder -ray is a price- 
based indicator that measures the power of bulls and bears below the surface 
of the markets. Force Index measures prices and volume. It shows whether 
the dominant market group is becoming stronger or weaker. 
The ninth chapter presents several trading systems. The Triple Screen 
trading system is my own method. I have used it for years. This and other 
systems show you how to select trades and find entry and exit points. 
The tenth chapter focuses on money management. This essential aspect of 
successful trading is neglected by most amateurs. You can have a brilliant 
trading system, but if your money management is bad, then a short string of 
6 INTRODUCTION 
losses will destroy your account. Trading without proper money manage - 
ment is like trying to cross a desert barefoot. 
You are about to spend many hours with this book. When you find ideas 
that seem valuable to you, test them in the one crucible that matters-your 
own experience. You can make this knowledge your own only by question- 
ing it. 
