20. TREND AND TRADING RANGE 
Traders try to profit from changes in prices: Buy low and sell high, or sell 
short high and cover low. Even a quick look at a chart reveals that markets 
spend most of their time in trading ranges. They spend less time in trends. 
A trend exists when prices keep rising or falling over time. In an 
uptrend, each rally reaches a higher high than the preceding rally and each 
decline stops at a higher level than the preceding decline. In a downtrend, 
each decline falls to a lower low than the preceding decline and each rally 
stops at a lower level than the preceding rally. In a trading range, most ral- 
lies stop at about the same high and declines peter out at about the same low. 
A trader needs to identify trends and trading ranges. It is easier to trade 
during trends (Figure 20-1). It is harder to make money when prices are flat 
unless you write options, which requires a special skill. 
Trading in trends and in trading ranges calls for different tactics. When 
you go long in an uptrend or sell short in a downtrend, you have to give that 
trend the benefit of the doubt and not be shaken out easily. It pays to buckle 
your seat belt and hang on for as long as the trend continues. When you trade 
in a trading range, you have to be nimble andclose out your position at the 
slightest sign of a reversal. 
Another difference in trading tactics between trends and trading ranges is 
the handling of strength and weakness. You have to follow strength during 
trends-buy in uptrends and sell short in downtrends. When prices are in a 
trading range, you have to do the opposite - buy weakness and sell strength. 
20. TREND AND TRADING RANGE 
- 340 
Soybeans . 330 
. 328 
. 310 
1 
~lh,{h+@~d . 278 
. 260 
2 
T 4 
 y 258 
Nou Dec .Jan Feb Mar 
 AP~ 
Figure 20-1. Trend and Trading Range 
A pattern of lower bottoms and lower tops defines downtrends. 
Soybeans declined from November until the middle of January. Bdttom 
4 was lower than bottom 2, and peak 3 lower than peak 1. The break of 
the downtrendline at point 5 signaled the end of the downtrend. A bro- 
ken downtrend can lead to either a trading range or an uptrend. 
The November-January downtrend has dissolved into a trading range, 
defined by horizontal lines drawn through the low 4 and highs 3 and 6. 
When the decline from high 6 stopped at a higher low 7 without reach - 
ing the bottom of the range, you could draw a preliminary uptrendline. 
A breakout from the range at point 8 confirmed the beginning of a new 
uptrend. 
At the right edge of the chart, prices are hovering just above their 
uptrendline. It is a buying opportunity because the trend is up. The 
downside risk of a trade can be limited by placing a stop either below 
the latest low or below the trendline. Notice that daily trading ranges 
(the distances from highs to lows) are relatively narrow. This is typical of 
a healthy trend. Trends often end after several wide-range days-a sign of 
blowoff action. 
CLASSICAL CHART ANALYSIS 
Mass Psychology 
An uptrend emerges when bulls are stronger than bears and their buying forces 
prices up. If bears manage to push prices down, bulls return in force, break the 
decline, and force prices to a new high. Downtrends occur when bears are 
stronger and their selling pushes markets down. When a flurry of buying lifts 
prices, bears sell short into that rally, stop it, and send prices to new lows. 
When bulls and bears are equally strong or weak, prices stay in a trading 
range. When bulls manage to push prices up, bears sell short into that rally 
and prices fall. Bargain hunters step in and break the decline; bears cover 
shorts, their buying fuels a minor rally, and the cycle repeats. 
A trading range is like a fight between two equally strong gangs. They 
push one another back and forth on a street comer but neither can control the 
turf. A trend is like a fight where a stronger gang chases the weaker gang 
down the street. Every once in a while the weaker gang stops and puts up a 
fight but then is forced to turn and run again. 
Prices in trading ranges go nowhere, just as crowds spend most of their 
time in aimless milling. Markets spend more time in trading ranges than in 
trends because aimlessness is more common among people than purposeful 
action. When a crowd becomes agitated, it surges and creates a trend. 
Crowds do not stay excited for long- they go back to meandering. 
Professionals tend to give the benefit of the doubt to trading ranges. 
The Hard Right Edge 
Identifying trends and trading ranges is one of the hardest tasks in technical 
analysis. It is easy to find them in the middle of a chart, but the closer you 
get to the right edge, the harder it gets. 
Trends and trading ranges clearly stand out on old charts. Experts show 
those charts at seminars and make it seem easy to catch trends. Trouble is, 
your broker does not allow you to trade in the middle of the chart. He says 
you must make your trading decisions at the hard right edge of the chart! 
The past is fixed and easy to analyze. The future is fluid and uncertain. By 
the time you identify a trend, a good chunk of it is gone. Nobody rings a bell 
when a trend dissolves into a trading range. By the time you recognize that 
change, you will lose some money trying to trade as if the market was still 
trending. 
20. TREND AND TRADING RANGE 83 
Many chart patterns and indicator signals contradict one another at the 
right edge of the chart. You have to base your decisions on probabilities in an 
atmosphere of uncertainty. 
Most people cannot accept uncertainty. They have a strong emotional 
need to be right. They hang onto losing positions, waiting for the market to 
turn and make them whole. Trying to be right in the market is very expen - 
sive. Professional traders get out of losing trades fast. When the market devi - 
ates from your analysis, you have to cut losses without fuss or emotions. 
Methods and Techniques 
) '-. - -- 
- 
There is no single magic method for identifying trends and trading ranges. 
There are several methods, and it pays to combine them. When they confirm 
one another, their message is reinforced. When they contradict one another, 
it is better to pass up a trade. 
1. Analyze the pattern of highs and lows. When rallies keep reaching 
higher levels and declines keep stopping at higher levels, they identify 
an uptrend. The pattern of lower lows and lower highs identifies a 
downtrend, and the pattern of irregular highs and lows points to a trad - 
ing range (Figure 20-1). 
2. Draw an uptrendline connecting significant recent lows and a down- 
trendline connecting significant recent highs (see Section 21). The 
slope of the latest trendline identifies the current trend (Figures 20 -1, 
20-2,21-1). 
A significant high or low on a daily chart is the highest high or the lowest 
low for at least a week. As you study charts, you become better at identify - 
ing those points. Technical analysis is partly a science and partly an art. 
3. Plot a 13-day or longer exponential moving average (see Section 25). 
The direction of its slope identifies the trend. If a moving average has 
not reached a new high or low in a month, then the market is in a trad- 
ing range. 
4. Several market indicators, such as MACD (see Section 26) and the 
Directional system (Section 27), help identify trends. The Directional 
system is especially good at catching early stages of new trends. 
84 CLASSICAL CHART ANALYSIS 
Ikc Jan Feb 
Figure 20-2. Trendlines Identify Trends 
The most important message of a trendline is the direction of its slope. 
When the slope is up, trade that market from the long side. When the 
slope is down, trade that market from the short side. 
The uptrendline connecting bottoms 1 and 2 identifies an uptrend. It 
tells you to trade heating oil only from the long side. Notice that some- 
times prices break their uptrendline but later pull back to it from below 
(3). This is a superb shorting opportunity. This happens again at point 7, 
where prices rise to their old uptrendline after breaking it. 
When you trade in the direction of the trendline, you are usually trad- 
ing in the direction of the market tide. At the right edge of the chart, you 
need to look for a shorting opportunity because the trend is down. Do 
not sell short immediately, because prices are too far below their down- 
trendline and your stop would have to be too wide. It is essential to wait 
for trades with a good riskheward ratio. Patience is a virtue for a trader. 
L 
Trade or Wait 
When you identify an uptrend and decide to buy, you have to decide whether 
to buy immediately or wait for a dip. If you buy fast, you get in gear with the 
trend, but your stops are likely to be farther away and you risk more. 
If you wait for a dip, you will risk less but will have four groups of com- 
20. TREND AND TRADING RANGE 85 
petitors: longs who want to add to their positions, shorts who want to get out 
even, traders who never bought, and traders who sold too early but are eager 
to buy. The waiting area for a pullback is very crowded! Markets are not 
known for their charity, and a deep pullback may well signal the beginning 
of a reversal. This reasoning also applies to downtrends. Waiting for pull - 
backs while a trend is gathering steam is an amateur's game. 
If the market is in a trading range and you are waiting for a breakout, you 
have to decide whether to buy in anticipation of a breakout, during a break - 
out, or on a pullback after a valid breakout. If you trade multiple positions, 
you can buy a third in anticipation, a third on a breakout, and a third on a 
pullback. 
Whatever method you use, there is one money management rule that will 
keep you out of the riskiest trades. The distance from the entry point to the 
level of a protective stop should never be more than 2 percent of your 
account equity (see Chapter 10). No matter how attractive a trade is, pass it 
up if it requires a wider stop. 
Money management tactics are different in trends and trading ranges. It 
pays to put on a smaller position in a trend but use a wider stop. Then you will 
be less likely to get shaken out by reactions while you keep risk under control. 
You may put on a bigger position in a trading range but use a tighter stop. 
Finding good entry points is extremely important in trading ranges. You 
have to be very precise because the profit potential is so limited. A trend is 
more forgiving of a sloppy entry, as long as you trade in the direction of the 
trend. Old traders chuckle: "Do not confuse brains with a bull market." 
When you cannot tell whether the market is in a trend or in a trading range, 
remember that professionals give the benefit of the doubt to trading ranges. 
If you are not sure, stand aside. 
Professionals love trading ranges because they can slide in and out of 
positions with little risk of being impaled on a trend. Since they pay low or 
no commissions and suffer little slippage, it is profitable for them to trade in 
gently fluctuating markets. Those of us who trade away from the floor are 
better off trying to catch trends. You can trade less frequently during trends, 
and your account suffers less from commissions and slippage. 
Conflicting Timeframes 
Most traders ignore the fact that markets usually are both in a trend and in a 
trading range at the same time! They pick one timeframe such as daily or 
86 CLASSICAL CHART ANALYSIS 
:: Eurodollars -Weekly 
.. 89 
" A C 88 
APP Jun Bug Oct Dec leb APP Jun Aug Gt Dee kb AR Jun Aug 
95 
:: Eurodollars - Daily 
T 94 
94 
93 
93 
93 
92 
92 
92 
Figure 20-3. Conflicting Trends in Different Timeframes 
The weekly chart of Eurodollars shows a perfect uptrend A-B. At the 
same time, the daily chart shows that a downtrend X-Y is beginning. 
Which of them will you follow? Contradictory signals in different time- 
frames in the same market are among the most common and thorny 
dilemmas in trading. You need to watch markets in more than one time- 
frame and know how to handle their conflicting signals. The Triple 
Screen trading system helps you solve this problem (see Section 43). 
hourly and look for trades on daily charts. With their attention fixed on daily 
or hourly charts, trends from other timeframes, such as weekly or 10-minute 
trends, keep sneaking up on them and wreaking havoc with their plans. 
Markets exist in several timeframes simultaneously (see Section 36). 
They exist on a 10-minute chart, an hourly chart, a daily chart, a weekly 
chart, and any other chart. The market may look like a buy on a daily chart 
but a sell on a weekly chart, and vice versa (Figure 20-3). The signals in dif- 
ferent timeframes of the same market often contradict one another. Which of 
them will you follow? 
When you are in doubt about a trend, step back and examine the charts in 
a timeframe that is larger than the one you are trying to trade. This search for 
a greater perspective is one of the key principles of the Triple Screen trading 
system (see Section 43). 
A losing trader often thinks he would be better off if he had a real-time 
quote machine on his desk. One of the universal fantasies of losers is that 
they would be winners if they could get their data faster and focused on a 
shorter timeframe. But they lose money even faster with a quote system! 
When that happens, some losers say they would be better off trading right on 
the exchange floor, without any delay for data transmission. But more than 
half of floor traders wash out in their first year; being in the middle of the 
action does not do losers any good. 
The conflicting signals in different timeframes of the same market are one 
of the great puzzles in market analysis. What looks like a trend on a daily 
chart may show up as a blip on a flat weekly chart. What looks like a flat 
trading range on a daily chart shows rich uptrends and downtrends on an 
hourly chart, and so on. When professionals are in doubt, they look at the big 
picture, but amateurs focus on the short-term charts. 
