21. TRENDLINES 
Charts reveal the actions of bulls and bears. Bottoms of declines show where 
bears stopped and bulls regained control of the market. Peaks of rallies show 
where bulls ran out of steam and bears gained control. A line connecting two 
nearby bottoms shows the lowest common denominator of bullish power. A 
line that connects two nearby tops shows the lowest common denominator of 
the power of bears. Those lines are called trendlines. Traders use them to 
identify trends. 
88 CLASSICAL CHART ANALYSIS 
When prices rally, draw an uptrendline across the bottoms. When prices 
decline, draw a downtrendline across the tops. Projecting those lines into the 
future helps anticipate buying and selling points. 
The most important feature of a trendline is its angle-it identifies the 
dominant market force. When a trendline points cp, it shows that bulls are in 
control. Then it pays to buy with a protective stop below the trendline. When 
a trendline points down, it shows that bears are in control. Then it pays to 
sell short and protect your position with a stop above the trendline. 
Trendlines are among the oldest tools of traders. Modem computerized 
tools for identifying trends include moving averages, the Directional system, 
and MACD (Chapter 4). 
How to Draw a Trendline 
Most chartists draw a trendline through extreme high and low points, but it is 
better to draw it through the edges of congestion areas (Figure 21-1). Those 
edges show where the majority of traders have reversed direction. Technical 
analysis is poll-taking - and polltakers want to track opinions of masses, not 
of a few extremists. Drawing trendlines through the edges of congestion 
areas is somewhat subjective. You have to watch out for the temptation to 
slant your ruler. 
Panic dumping by bulls at the bottoms and panic covering by bears at the 
tops create extremes, which appear as long "tails" on the charts. You want to 
base your trendlines on the edges of congestion areas and not on tails 
because tails show little about the crowd other than its tendency to panic. 
The extreme points are very important -but not for drawing trendlines. 
Markets usually recoil from those tails, offering opportunities to short -term 
traders (Figure 21 -1). As Steidlmayer pointed out, a bar that looks like a fin - 
ger sticking out of a tight chart pattern provides a valuable reference point 
for short-term traders. 
Markets constantly fluctuate, seeking an area that generates the highest 
volume of trading. A tail shows that a certain price has been rejected by the 
market. It usually leads to a swing in the opposite direction. As soon as you 
recognize a tail, trade against it. Place your protective stop halfway through 
the tail. If the market starts "chewing its tail," it is time to get out. 
Victor Sperandeo described another method for drawing trendlines in his 
book, Trader Kc. His technique helps identify reversals of well -established 
trends (Figure 21-2). 
Sperandeo draws an uptrendline from the lowest low of the move to the 
Figure 21-1. Trendlines and "Tails" 
Draw trendlines through the edges of congestion areas and leave out the 
extreme prices. Tails are long bars at the ends of trends-they spring out- 
side of congestion areas. Markets recoil from tails, offering good trading 
opportunities in the opposite direction. 
Notice how the angles of uptrends tend to recur, month after month. 
Knowing this can help you draw preliminary trendlines. At the right edge 
of the chart, prices are touching their uptrendline -buy as soon as you 
see a bar that fails to reach a new low. 
7 
highest minor low prior to the highest high. That line may not pass through 
prices between those two points. When that trendline is broken, it gives the 
first signal of a trend change. The second signal is given when prices retest 
the recent high and back away from it. The third signal occurs when prices 
break through the previous minor low. It confirms that the uptrend has 
reversed. A mirror image of this method applies to downtrends. 
Rating Trendlines 
The single most important feature of a trendline is its slope. When a trend- 
line slants up, bulls are in control and it pays to look for buying opportuni- 
90 CLASSICAL CHART ANALYSIS 
Figure 21-2. 1-2-3 Reversal Method 
Draw a trendline from the highest high (A) to the highest minor high (B) 
preceding the lowest low (C) so that it does not pass through prices 
between A and B. The break of this trendline (1) is the first signal of a 
trend change. A test of the recent low (2) gives the second signal of a 
trend change. This is a good time to start buying. When prices break 
through their minor high (3), they will confirm that the trend has 
reversed. This method, described by Victor Sperandeo, helps catch 
major reversals rather than shorter -term swings. 
ties. When a trendline slants down, bears are in control and it pays to look 
for shorting opportunities. You can rate the importance of any trendline by 
examining five factors: the timeframe of the trendline, its length, the number 
of times prices touch it, its angle, and volume. 
The longer the timeframe, the more important the trendline. A trendline 
on a weekly chart identifies a more important trend than a daily trendline. A 
trendline on a daily chart identifies a more important trend than an hourly 
trendline, and so on. 
The longer the trendline, the more valid it is. A short trendline reflects 
mass behavior over a short period. A longer trendline reflects .mass behavior 
over a longer time. The longer a trend continues, the greater its inertia. A 
major bull market may follow its trendline for several years. 
The more contacts between prices and trendline, the more valid that line. 
When the trend is up, a return to the trendline shows a rebellion among 
bears. When the trend is down, a rally to the trendline shows a rebellion by 
the bulls. When prices pull back to a trendline and then bounce away from it, 
you know that the dominant market group has beaten the rebels. 
A preliminary trendline is drawn across only two points. Three points of 
contact make that line more valid. Four or five points of contact show that 
the dominant market crowd is firmly in control. 
The angle between a trendline and the horizontal axis reflects the emo- 
tional intensity of the dominant market crowd. A steep trendline shows that 
the dominant crowd is moving rapidly. A relatively flat trendline shows that 
the dominant crowd is moving slowly. A shallow trendline is likely to last 
longer, like a turtle racing against a hare. 
It pays to measure the angle of every trendline and write it down on your 
chart (Figure 21-1). This can be done using a computer, a protractor, or a 
Chinese Charting Tool. Comparing angles of trendlines shows whether the 
dominant market crowd is becoming more bullish or bearish. It is uncanny 
how often trendlines trace the same angle time and again in a given market. 
It may be because the key players seldom change. 
Sometimes prices accelerate away from their trendline. Then you can draw a 
new, steeper trendline. It shows that a trend is speeding up, becoming unsustain- 
able (Figure 21-3). When you draw a new, steeper trendline, tighten your stop, 
place it immediately below the latest trendline, and adjust that stop at every new 
bar. The breaking of a steep trendline is usually followed by a sharp reversal. 
When the trend is up, volume normally expands when prices rally and 
shrinks when they decline. This shows that rallies attract traders while 
declines leave them cold. The opposite occurs in downtrends-volume 
expands on declines and shrinks on rallies. A pullback on heavy volume 
threatens a trendline because it shows that the rebellious crowd is growing. 
If volume expands when prices move in the direction of a trendline, it con- 
firms that trendline; if volume shrinks when prices pull back to a trendline, it 
also confirms the trendline. If volume expands when prices return to a trend- 
line, it warns of a potential break; if volume shrink when prices pull away 
from a trendline, it warns that the trendline is in danger. 
Trendline Breaks 
The breaking of a well-established trendline shows that the dominant market 
crowd has lost its power. You have to be careful not to anticipate trading sig - 
nals- most traders lose money when they jump the gun. 
92 CLASSICAL CHART ANALYSIS 
I Figure 21-3. When Trendlines Accelerate I 
The stock market rose slowly but steadily from its 1987 bottom. You 
' could buy each time prices touched their shallow uptrendline (1). The 
uptrend accelerated in 1988, and at point A, a new uptrendline (2) had 
1 to be drawn. When the new, steeper trendline was broken, it indicated 
that the bull move was over. The market offered, as it sometimes does, 
an excellent shorting opportunity at point 8, when it pulled back to its 
old uptrendline before crashing. 
A trendline is not a glass floor under the market-one crack and it is 
gone. It is more like a fence that bulls or bears can lean on. They can even 
violate it a bit without toppling it, the way animals shake a fence. A trendline 
break is valid only if prices close on the other side of a trendline. Some 
traders insist that a trendline has to be penetrated by two or three percentage 
points of price 
($%$I2 in the case of $40010~. gold). 
After a very steep uptrend is broken, prices often rally again, retest their 
old high, and touch their old uptrendline from below (Figures 20 -2, 21-3). 
When that happens, you have a near-perfect shorting opportunity: a combi- 
nation of a double top, a pullback to an old trendline, and perhaps a bearish 
divergence from technical indicators. The reverse also applies to down- 
trends. 
21. TRENDLINES 93 
Trading Rules 
1. Trade in the direction of the slope of a trendline. If it points up, look 
for buying opportunities and avoid shorting. When the slope is down, 
trade from the short side and avoid buying. 
2. A trendline provides support or resistance, When prices rise, place buy 
orders at the uptrendline and protective orders below. Reverse the pro - 
cedure in downtrends. 
3. Steep trendlines precede sharp breaks. If a trendline is steeper than 
45", place your stop right at the trendline and adjust it daily. 
4. Prices often retest their latest extreme after breaking a steep trendline. 
A pullback rally to an old high on falling volume and with indicator 
divergences provides an excellent shorting opportunity. A decline to 
an old low after a downtrendline is broken provides a low -risk buying 
opportunity. 
5. Draw a channel line parallel to a trendline and use it as a target for 
profit taking. 
Trendline Channels 
A channel consists of two parallel lines that contain prices (Figure 21-4). If 
you draw an uptrendline across the bottoms of reactions, you can draw a 
channel line parallel to it across the tops of rallies. When you draw a down- 
trendline across the tops of rallies, you can also draw a channel line parallel 
to it across the bottoms of declines. 
Channel lines, like trendlines, should be drawn across the edges of con- 
gestion areas, leaving out the extreme highs and lows. The presence of a 
channel line reinforces the validity of the trendline itself. The validity of 
channel lines depends on how many times they were touched by prices. 
A channel line marks the area of bulls7 maximum power in an uptrend and 
bears7 maximum power in a downtrend. The wider the channel, the stronger 
the trend. It pays to trade in the direction of the channel's slope, going long 
in the lower quarter or half of a rising channel and selling short in the upper 
quarter or half of a falling channel. Profits should be taken at the opposite 
channel wall (see also Section 45). 
94 CLASSICAL CHART ANALYSIS 
A Preliminary Trendline 
t 
Normally, a trendline touches at least two points on a chart. There is a little- 
known technique for drawing a preliminary trendline thro~igh only one point 
(Figure 21-4). 
When prices break their downtrend and rally above it, you can assume 
that the downtrend has ended and a new uptrend may begin. Connect the two 
latest peaks - this is the channel line of the new uptrend. Draw a line parallel + 388 
:: "" 
gIII'l11 
I/,,{ 
I, 
 111 t\ ,J 
::Iu\& 
1' 
$'y .. 278 
Jun 
Figure 21-4. Trendline Channels and Preliminary Trendlines 
The downtrendline 1, drawn across rally peaks, identifies a bear market 
in corn. A channel line 2 is drawn across the lows, parallel to the trend- 
line. The channel line helps track the maximum power of bears in a 
downtrend. The best shorting opportunities are in the upper half of a 
falling channel, while the best buying opportunities are in the lower half 
of a rising channel. 
When prices break out above their downtrendline, channels can help 
you draw a preliminary uptrendline. First, draw a new channel line 3 to 
connect the last two rally tops. Then draw line 4 parallel to it, touching 
the latest bottom. This is the new preliminary uptrendline. 
At the right edge of the chart, corn is trending higher. It is expen- 
sive-near its upper channel line. If you want to go long, place an order 
to buy in the vicinity of the new uptrendline 4. 
22. GAPS 95 
to it through the latest low. This preliminary uptrendline, drawn parallel to a 
channel line, tells you where to expect the next bottom. It often points to 
excellent buying opportunities. This procedure tends to work better at bot- 
toms than at the tops. 
More on Trendlines 
When prices break their uptrend, measure the vertical distance from the 
trendline to the latest top and project it down from the breaking point. If the 
crowd can become optimistic enough to swing prices so many dollars above 
the trendline, then it is likely to become equally pessimistic and swing prices 
the same distance down from the trendline. Reverse this procedure in down- 
trends. This method gives you the minimum target for a new move, which is 
often exceeded. 
Trendlines can also be applied to volume and to indicators. The slope of 
a trendline of volume shows whether more or fewer people are becoming 
involved in the market. A rising trendline of volume confirms the current 
price trend. A falling trendline of volume shows that the market crowd is 
refusing to follow the current price trend. Among technical indicators, the 
Relative Strength Index (see Section 31) is especially well suited for trend- 
line analysis. It often breaks its trendlines in advance of prices, providing an 
early warning of a trend change. 
