22. GAPS 
A gap is a chart pattern that consists of two adjacent bars, where the low of 
one bar is higher than the high of the other bar (Figure 22-1). It shows that 
no trades took place at a certain price, only at higher and lower levels. 
Webster's Dictionary defines: "Gap: 1. a hole or opening, as in a wall or 
fence, made by breaking or parting; breach. 2. an interruption of continuity 
in space or time; hiatus; lacuna." 
Gaps occur when prices jump in response to a sudden imbalance of buy or 
sell orders. A scary piece of news often triggers gaps. Gaps on daily charts 
show reactions to events that took place while the market was closed. Had 
the news come out during trading hours, a gap might have occurred only on 
intraday charts and perhaps have led to a wider daily range. 
For example, a strike at a major copper mine is bullish for copper. If the 
news comes out in the evening, the shorts become frightened and want to 
96 CLASSICAL CHART ANALYSIS 
cover. They flood the pit with buy orders before the opening bell. Floor 
traders respond by opening copper above the previous day's high. The smart 
money, incidentally, has probably bought copper before the strike was 
announced. Smart money tends to put on trades when markets are quiet, but 
amateurs tend to jump on the news. 
Gaps show that the trading crowd is spooked, that losers are getting hurt 
and dumping their positions. When you know that bulls or bears are hurting, 
you can figure out what they are likely to do next and trade accordingly. 
Some gaps are valid; others are phony. Valid gaps occur when the market 
skips a price level. Phony gaps occur when a financial instrument trades in 
another market while the market you analyze is closed. For example, daily 
charts of Chicago currency futures are full of phony gaps. Currencies trade 
in Tokyo, London, and elsewhere while the Chicago Mercantile Exchange is 
22. CAPS 97 
Figure 22-1. Gaps 
Cover this chart with a sheet of paper and slide it slowly from left to right. 
A. A breakaway gap. Sell short and place a stop a few ticks above the 
gap's upper rim. 
6. An exhaustion gap-prices pull back into it the next day. The down- 
trend is over. Cover shorts immediately. 
C. Another exhaustion gap, marked by a lack of new highs after the gap. 
Several days of churning offer good shorting opportunities with a stop 
above the high. 
D. A continuation gap in a downtrend. Go short, with a stop a few ticks 
above the gap's upper rim. Prices hit that stop a few days later-no 
method is fail-safe. 
E. An exhaustion gap, closed two days after it opened. Cover shorts 
immediately. 
F. A common gap in the midst of a congestion area, closed the next day. 
No action recommended. 
G. A breakaway gap. Go long and place a protective stop a few ticks 
below the gap's lower rim. 
H. A continuation gap. Add to longs and place a protective stop a few 
ticks below the gap's lower rim. The gap at the right edge of this chart 
could be either a continuation or an exhaustion gap. Relatively quiet 
volume suggests continuation. If you buy, place a protective stop a 
few ticks below the lower rim of this gap. 
closed. When the exchange reopens, its prices gap simply to reflect price 
changes overseas. 
All gaps can be divided into four major groups: common, breakaway, con- 
tinuation, and exhaustion. You need to identify them because each tells a dif- 
ferent story and calls for different trading tactics. 
Common Gaps 
Common gaps are rapidly closed-prices return into the gap within a few 
days. Common gaps usually occur in quiet trendless markets. They are seen 
in futures contracts for late delivery, in thinly traded stocks, and at sold-out, 
low-volume market bottoms. 
98 CLASSICAL CHART ANALYSIS 
Common gaps show no follow-through -no new highs after an upside 
gap or new lows after a downside gap. Volume may slightly increase on the 
day of a common gap, but the following days show a return to average vol- 
ume. The lack of new highs or lows and indifferent volume show that neither 
bulls nor bears have strong feelings about the market. Common gaps are the 
least useful of all gaps for trading. 
Common gaps occur more often than other gaps. It takes very little to cre - 
ate them in a dull market. A Comex floor trader at one of our seminars spoke 
of how he could push gold up or down $2 an ounce on a quiet day. He was 
known as a big trader and if he suddenly began bidding for 20 contracts at a 
time, other floor traders stepped back, figuring he knew something. Gold 
would gap up, and the trick for him was to sell before that gap was closed. 
An ex-dividend gap is a common gap that occurs in the stock market on the 
day a dividend becomes payable. For example, if the dividend is 50 cents, then 
each share is worth 50 cents less after that dividend is paid. This is similar to a 
drop in the price of a cow after it delivers a calf. Once the calf is born, the price 
of the cow falls by the amount of the calf's price because it is no longer 
included with the cow. Ex-dividend gaps were common in the old days. Today, 
the average daily range of a dividend-paying stock is greater than the amount of 
its dividend, and the ex-dividend drop seldom results in a gap. 
Breakaway Gaps 
A breakaway gap occurs when prices leap out of a congestion zone on heavy 
volume and begin a new trend. A breakaway gap can remain open for weeks 
or months, and sometimes years. The longer the range that preceded the gap, 
the longer the subsequent trend. 
An upside breakaway gap is usually followed by new highs for several 
days in a row, and a downside breakaway gap is followed by a series of new 
lows. There is a sharp increase in volume on the day of the breakaway gap 
and for several days after that. Volume on the day of the gap may be twice as 
high as the average volume for the previous few days. 
A breakaway gap marks a major change in mass mentality- it reveals a 
great pressure behind the new trend. The sooner you jump aboard the new 
trend, the better. 
Most gaps are common gaps that are quickly closed. Professional traders 
like to fade them - trade against gaps. You have to be careful because if you 
do it mechanically, sooner or later a breakaway gap will clobber you. It takes 
deep pockets to hold a losing position for months, waiting for a gap to close. 
22. GAPS 
Continuation Gaps 
A continuation gap occurs in the midst of a powerful trend, which continues 
to reach new highs or new lows without filling the gap. It is similar to a 
breakaway gap but occurs in the middle of a trend rather than in the begin- 
ning. Continuation gaps show a new surge of power among the dominant 
market crowd. The inflationary bull markets in commodities in the 1970s 
had many of them. 
A continuation gap can help you estimate how far a trend is likely to 
carry. Measure the vertical distance from the beginning of a trend to the gap, 
and then project it from the gap in the direction of the trend. When the mar- 
ket approaches that target, it is time to begin taking profits. 
Volume confirms continuation gaps when it jumps at least 50 percent 
above the average for the previous few days. If prices do not reach new 
highs or new lows for several days after a gap, you are probably dealing with 
a treacherous exhaustion gap. 
Exhaustion Gaps 
An exhaustion gap is not followed by new highs during uptrends or new lows 
during downtrends-prices churn and then return into the gap and close it. 
Exhaustion gaps appear at the ends of trends. Prices rise or fall for several 
weeks or months, and then gap in the direction of the trend. At first, an 
exhaustion gap looks like a continuation gap-a leap in the direction of the 
trend on heavy volume. If prices fail to reach new highs or new lows for sev- 
eral days after the gap, it is probably an exhaustion gap. 
An exhaustion gap is confirmed only when prices reverse and close it. 
This gap is like the last spurt of a tired athlete. He springs away from the 
pack but cannot sustain the pace; as soon as others close in on him, you 
know that he will lose the race. 
Trading Rules 
1. Common gaps do not offer good trading opportunities, but if you must 
trade, fade them. If prices gap up, sell short as soon as the market 
stops reaching new highs and place a protective stop above the high of 
the past few days; cover shorts and take profits at the lower rim of the 
1 00 CLASSICAL CHART ANALYSIS 
gap. If prices gap down, go long as soon as the market stops reaching 
new lows and place a protective stop below the low of the past few 
days; place an order to sell and take profits at the upper rim of the gap. 
2. If a market gaps out of a long trading range on a burst of volume and 
continues to make new highs or lows, you are probably dealing with a 
breakaway gap. If prices have gapped to the upside, buy and place a 
protective stop at the lower rim of the gap. A valid breakaway gap 
almost never gets closed. Reverse the procedure in downtrends. 
Waiting for a pullback when a new trend has just begun may leave you 
on the sidelines. 
3. Trading a continuation gap is similar to trading a breakaway gap - buy 
early and place a protective stop at the lower rim of the gap. Reverse 
the procedure in downtrends. Tighten your stops when a trend 
approaches its target as projected by the continuation gap. 
4. A valid breakaway or continuation gap must be confirmed by a series 
of several new highs or lows. Otherwise, you may be dealing with an 
exhaustion gap. If the market refuses to reach new highs or lows in the 
direction of the gap, exit your trade and re -evaluate the market from 
the sidelines. 
5. Exhaustion gaps offer attractive trading opportunities because they are 
often followed by violent reversals. When you identify an upside 
exhaustion gap, sell short and place a protective stop above the latest 
high. Once prices begin to slide, weak bulls will start bailing out. Stay 
short as long as prices continue to reach new lows and cover the day 
after prices fail to make a new low. Reverse the procedure in down- 
trends. Because of high volatility, exhaustion gaps are easier to trade 
using options, especially buying puts at the tops. 
More on Gaps 
An island reversal is a combination of a continuation gap and a breakaway 
gap in the opposite direction. An island reversal looks like an island, sepa - 
rated from the rest of price action by a gulf in which no trading took place. It 
begins as a continuation gap, followed by a compact trading range with high 
trading volume. Then prices gap in the opposite direction and leave behind 
an island of prices. This pattern occurs very seldom, but it marks major 
reversal areas. Trade against the trend that preceded an island. 
23. CHART PATTERNS 101 
It pays to watch for gaps in related markets. If gold shows a breakaway 
gap but silver and platinum do not, then you may get a chance to position for 
a "catch-up move" in a market that has not yet become frenzied. 
Gaps can serve as support and resistance levels. If greater volume 
occurred after an upside gap, it indicates very strong support. If greater vol - 
ume occurred before the gap, then support is less strong. 
Technical indicators help identify types of gaps. The Force Index (see 
Section 42) is based on price and volume. If Force Index shows only a minor 
change on the day of a gap, it is probably a common gap. When Force Index 
reaches a record high or a low level for several weeks, it confirms break- 
away and continuation gaps. 
Intraday charts show many opening gaps, when prices open outside the 
previous day's range. When there is an imbalance of public buy and sell 
orders before the opening, floor traders open markets higher or lower. If out- 
siders want to buy, floor traders sell to them at such a high price that the 
slightest dip will make them money. If customers want to sell, floor traders 
will take merchandise off their hands- at a price that is low enough to profit 
from the slightest bounce. Professionals play it cool - they know that crowds 
seldom stay excited for long and prices tend to pull back into yesterday's 
range. They sell above that range or buy below, waiting to unwind their posi - 
tions and take profits when the opening gap is closed. 
If you trade the S&P 500 futures, remember that their opening gaps are 
almost always closed. If the S&P 500 futures open higher, they almost 
always sink during the day and touch their previous day's high. If they open 
lower, they almost always rally during the day and touch their previous day's 
low. Savvy day-traders tend to sell short higher openings and buy lower 
openings. This is not a mechanical method-you have to buy or sell only 
after indicators tell you that the force behind the opening gap has been spent 
and the market is ready to close the gap. 
