23. CHART PATTERNS 
The patterns you see on your chart or computer screen are the trails left by 
bulls and bears. A chartist is a hunter who follows subtle signs, visible only 
to those who know what to look for. Chart patterns can help you decide 
when a trend is likely to continue or to reverse. 
There are two main groups of patterns: continuation and reversal. 
Continuation patterns include flags and pennants. They suggest trading in 
102 CLASSICAL CHART ANALYSIS 
the direction of the current trend. Reversal patterns include head and shoul- 
ders, inverse head and shoulders, and double tops and bottoms. They indi - 
cate it is time to take profits on existing positions. Some patterns can serve 
as either continuation or reversal formations. Triangles and rectangles are 
notorious for doing that double duty. 
When several chart patterns point in the same direction, their signals are 
reinforced. For example, if an uptrendline gets broken when a head-and- 
shoulders top is being completed, they both confirm that the uptrend is end- 
ing. When different patterns give conflicting messages, their signals cancel 
one another, and it is better not to trade. 
Head-and-Shoulders Tops 
A healthy uptrend moves up in steps. Most rallies reach higher peaks than 
the preceding rally and declines stop at a higher level than the previous 
decline. When an uptrend fails to reach a higher high or a decline falls below 
the previous low, it shows that bulls are losing their grip. 
Head-and-shoulders tops mark the ends of uptrends (Figure 23-1). The 
"head" is a price peak surrounded by two lower peaks, or "shoulders." A 
neckline connects the lows of declines from the left shoulder and the head. 
The neckline does not have to be horizontal-it may be flat, rising, or 
falling. A downsloping neckline is especially bearish-it shows that bears 
are becoming stronger. 
When prices fail to rally above the head, they confirm that a head-and- 
shoulders top is developing. The right shoulder may be higher or lower than 
the left and may be shorter or longer. The decline from the right shoulder 
breaks the neckline. When that happens, the uptrend is dead. 
After breaking the neckline, prices sometimes pull back to it on low vol- 
ume. This feeble rally offers an excellent shorting opportunity, with a logical 
stop just above the neckline. 
Head-and-shoulders tops often have typical volume patterns. Volume is 
often lower on the head than on the left shoulder. It is even lower on the right 
shoulder. Volume tends to increase when prices break the neckline. When 
prices pull back to it, volume is very thin. 
A head-and-shoulders pattern provides an approximate target for the new 
downtrend. You can obtain it by measuring the distance from the top of the 
head to the neckline and projecting this down from the neckline. 
267 
263 
258 
253 
218 
243 
238 
233 
228 
548460 
411345 
274230 
137115 
0 
Figure 23-1. Head and Shoulders 
An uptrend remains healthy as long as each new rally 
reach- 
high. Rising volume 
confirm-when prices reach the 
-d (H) and flashes a warning to tighten stops on long positions. The 
decline from the head breaks the uptrendline and signals that the 
uptrend is over. 
The head, in this case, is an "island reversal" (see "Gaps," Section 
22)-a very bearish pattern. Volume shoots up ominously during the 
decline from the head. The right shoulder (RS) is much smaller than the 
left-another sign of weakness. Low volume on the right shoulder also 
points to a good shorting opportunity. 
The decline from the right shoulder breaks the neckline. This com- 
pletes the .head -and-shoulders pattern. There is an excellent shorting 
opportunity when prices pull back to the neckline from below on low 
volume. The distance from the top of the head to the neckline (A) pro- 
vides a target for the decline (B). At the right edge of the chart, hold shorts 
because prices continue to fall on rising volume and have not reached 
their target; place a protective stop at the top of the past 5 days' range. 
* 
CLASSICAL CHART ANALYSIS 
Trading Rules 
Once you identify a head -and-shoulders top, you need to make two trading 
decisions: what to do about your long position and how to go about shorting. 
You have three choices for managing your longs: sell them outright, tighten 
your stops, or sell some and hold the rest. 
Many traders take the fourth choice - they simply freeze and do nothing. 
Trading is a complex, nontrivial game that demands making decisions in an 
atmosphere of uncertainty. 
Your decision depends on how certain you feel about the pattern. It also 
depends on the size of your account. A large account allows you to buy and 
sell gradually. Having to trade a single contract in a small account demands 
precise timing- it is a good school for a beginning trader. 
You must analyze your charts in more than one timeframe (see Section 
36). If weekly charts are toppy, a head-and-shoulders pattern on the dailies 
should prompt you to run for the exit. If weeklies are strong, then it is often 
better to simply tighten the stops. Technical indicators can also help you 
decide how urgent it is to sell. 
Markets often are more volatile at tops, with wide swings between short- 
term highs and lows. Selling short and placing a stop above the latest high 
may expose you to more risk than the maximum amount allowed per con - 
tract in your account (see Chapter 10). You may have to pass up the trade or 
buy puts to keep your monetary risk within allowed limits. 
1. Sell when you recognize the head or the right shoulder of a head-and- 
shoulders pattern, based on low volume, a break of an uptrend, and a 
divergence between indicators and prices. 
2. The decline from the head establishes a neckline. If you still hold a 
long position, place a stop below the neckline. 
3. The rally to the right shoulder is usually marked by low volume and 
glaring weakness in technical indicators; it offers the last good oppor - 
tunity to cash out of the uptrend. Technical indicators often reach 
higher levels on the right shoulder than on the head but they never 
exceed the levels reached during the left shoulder. When you sell short 
into the right shoulder, place your stop at the top of the head. Make 
that order 
"stop-and-reverse"-if stopped out of the short position, 
reverse and go long (see "The Hound of the Baskervilles " signal). 
23. CHART PATTERNS 105 
4. Once the neckline is broken, a pullback on low volume offers an 
excellent shorting opportunity, with a protective stop slightly above 
the neckline. 
The Hound of the Baskervilles 
This signal occurs when a reliable chart or indicator pattern does not lea$ to 
the action you expect and prices move in the opposite direction. A head-and- 
shoulders pattern indicates that the uptrend is over. If prices continue to rise, 
they give the Hound of the Baskervilles signal. 
This signal is named after the story by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle in which 
Sherlock Holmes was called to solve a murder at a country estate. He found 
the essential clue when he realized that the family dog did not bark while the 
murder was being committed. That meant the dog knew the criminal and the 
murder was an inside job. The signal was given by the lack of expected 
action - by the lack of barking! 
When the market refuses to bark in response to a perfectly good signal, it 
gives you the Hound of the Baskervilles signal. This shows that something is 
fundamentally changing below the surface. Then it is time to get in gear with 
the new powerful trend. 
A head-and-shoulders pattern gives a strong sell signal. If the market 
refuses to collapse but rallies from the right shoulder, it gives you its Hound 
of the Baskervilles signal. When pqces rise above the head, it is time to 
cover shorts, reverse, and go long. An aborted head -and-shoulders top often 
leads to a very strong rally. Buy the upside breakout, and place a protective 
stop slightly below the top of the head. 
Inverse Head and Shoulders 
Some traders call this pattern a head -and-shoulders bottom -a mirror image 
of a head-and-shoulders top. It looks like a silhouette of a person upside 
down: the head at the lowest point, surrounded by two shoulders. This pat- 
tern develops when a downtrend loses its force and gets ready to reverse 
(Figure 23-2). 
In a valid downtrend, each new low falls lower than the previous low, and 
each rally stops at a lower level. A strong rally from the head allows you to 
1 06 CLASSICAL CHART ANALYSIS 
Figure 23-2. Inverse Head and Shoulders 
While the downtrend is in effect, high volume confirms all declines until 
the left shoulder (LS). The decline into the head (H) comes on low vol- 
ume-a warning to the bears. The rally out of the head breaks above the 
downtrendline and signals that the downtrend is over. 
Low volume during the right shoulder (RS) and the upward-sloping 
neckline indicate that a powerful rally is coming. The burst of volume 
during the neckline break confirms the new uptrend. No pullback ever 
reached this neckline. 
The preliminary target (B) is as high above the neckline as the head of 
the pattern (A) is below it. It is common for rallies out of 
head-and-shoul- 
ders bottoms to exceed their targets. The best buying opportunity was at 
the right shoulder, with a protective stop a few ticks below the head. At 
the right edge of the chart, a gap confirms a strong uptrend. Place a pro- 
tective stop on long positions a few ticks below the gap's lower rim. 
draw a neckline. When a decline from the neckline fails to reach the level of 
the head, it creates the right shoulder. When prices rally from the right shoul- 
23. CHART PATTERNS 107 
der above the neckline on increased volume, they complete the head-and- 
shoulders bottom and a new uptrend begins. 
Sometimes a head-and-shoulders bottom is followed by a pullback to the 
neckline on low volume, offering an excellent buying opportunity. Measure 
I 
I the distance from the bottom of the head to the neckline and project it 
upward from the point where the neckline was broken. This gives you a min- 
imum measurement for a rally, which is frequently exceeded. 
The tactics for trading inverse head and shoulders is similar to head-and- 
shoulders tops. You risk less money trading at bottoms because prices are 
less volatile, and you can use closer stops. 
Rectangles 
A rectangle is a chart pattern that contains price movements between two 
parallel lines. They are usually horizontal but can sometimes slant up or 
down (see "Lines and Flags," later in this section). Rectangles and triangles 
can serve as continuation or reversal patterns. 
You need four points to draw a rectangle: The upper line connects two 
rally tops, and the lower line connects two bottoms (Figure 23-3). These 
lines should be drawn through the edges of congestion areas rather than 
across the extreme highs and lows (see Section 19). 
The upper line of a rectangle identifies resistance, while the lower line 
identifies support. The upper line shows where bulls run out of steam; the 
lower line shows where bears become exhausted. A rectangle shows that 
bulls and bears are evenly matched. The key question is whether bulls or 
bears will eventually win the battle within this pattern. 
If volume swells when prices approach the upper border of a rectangle, an 
upside breakout is more likely. If volume increases when prices approach the 
lower border, a downside breakout is more likely. A valid breakout from a 
rectangle is usually confirmed by an increase in volume - one-third to one- 
half higher than the average of the previous five days. If volume is thin, it is 
likely to be a false breakout. 
Rectangles tend to be wider in uptrends and narrower in downtrends. The 
longer a rectangle, the more significant a breakout. Breakouts from rectan - 
gles on weekly charts are especially important because they mark important 
victories for bulls or bears. 
There are several techniques for projecting how far a breakout is likely to 
go. Measure the height of a rectangle and project it from the broken wall in 
108 CLASSICAL CHART ANALYSIS 
92,60 
9240 
92,20 
92,U 
91,80 
91-68 
91,M 
91,20 
91,W 
90,80 
Figure 23-3. Rectangles 
The upper border of each rectangle is drawn across two or more highs. 
The lower border is drawn across two or more lows. A rectangle may 
serve either as a continuation or a reversal pattern. As long as a major 
trendline is intact, a rectangle is more likely to serve as a continuation 
pattern. 
After prices break out of a rectangle, they often return and touch its 
wall from the outside (B, D, and E). These pullbacks offer excellent 
entries into low-risk trades in the direction of the breakout, with a pro- 
tective stop inside the rectangle. 
The same price levels tend to serve as both support and resistance. 
Notice how line D turned from support into resistance and back into 
support. At the right edge of the chart, prices are well above their 
uptrendline, and it is better to wait for a pullback before buying. 
the direction of the breakout. This is the minimum target. The maximum tar - 
get is obtained by taking the length of the rectangle and projecting it verti- 
cally from the broken wall in the direction of a breakout. Tony Plummer 
writes that a rectangle is a part of a spiral -like development of a trend. He 
recommends measuring the height of a rectangle, multiplying it by three 
23. CHART PATTERNS 109 
Fibonacci ratios (1.618, 2.618, and 4.236), and projecting those measure - 
ments in the direction of the breakout to obtain a price target. 
Trading Rules 
Floor traders can profit from trading short -term swings between a rectangle's 
walls, but the big money is made by trading in the direction of a breakout. 
1. When trading within a rectangle, buy at the lower boundary and sell 
short at the upper boundary. Oscillators can help you decide when 
prices are ready to reverse within a rectangle. Stochastic, the Relative 
Strength Index, and Williams %R (see Chapter 4) mark price rever - 
sals within rectangles when they hit their reference lines and change 
direction. 
If you buy at the lower border of a rectangle, place your protective 
stop slightly below that rectangle. If you sell short near the upper wall 
of a rectangle, place a protective stop slightly above that border. You 
have to be very nimble and take profits at the first sign of a reversal. It 
is dangerous to hold on for a few extra ticks within a rectangle. 
2. To find out whether an upside or a downside breakout is more likely, 
analyze the market in a longer timeframe than the one you are trading. 
If you want to catch a breakout on a daily chart, identify the weekly 
trend because a breakout is more likely to go in its direction (see 
Section 43). 
3. Once you buy an upside breakout or sell short a downside breakout, 
place your protective stop slightly inside the rectangle. There may be a 
pullback to the rectangle wall on light volume, but prices should not 
return into a rectangle after a valid breakout. 
Lines and Flags 
A line is a kind of a rectangle-a lengthy congestion area. In Dow theory, a 
line is a correction against the primary trend. It is a congestion zone whose 
height is approximately 3 percent of current stock market value. When the 
stock market "draws a line " instead of reacting more deeply against its major 
trend, it shows a particularly strong primary trend. 
A flag is a rectangle whose boundaries are parallel but slant up or down. 
110 CLASSICAL CHART ANALYSIS 
Breakouts tend to go against the slope of the flag. If a flag slants upward, a 
downside breakout is more likely. If the flag slants down, an upside breakout 
is more likely. 
If you see a downsloping flag in an uptrend, place a buy order above the 
latest peak of the flag to catch an upside breakout. A rising flag in an uptrend 
marks distribution, and a downside breakout is more likely. Place an order to 
sell short below the latest low of that flag. Reverse the procedure in down - 
trends. 
Triangles 
A triangle is a congestion area whose upper and lower boundaries converge 
on the right (Figure 23-4). It can serve either as a reversal or, more often, as 
a continuation pattern. Some technicians call triangles coils. The market 
winds up and the energy of traders becomes compressed, ready to spring 
from a triangle. 
A small triangle whose height is 10 to 15 percent of the preceding trend is 
more likely to serve as a continuation pattern. Many uptrends and down- 
trends are punctuated by these triangles, as sentences are punctuated by com - 
mas. Large triangles whose height equals a third or more of the preceding 
trend are more likely to serve as reversal patterns. Finally, some triangles 
simply fizzle out into listless trading ranges. 
Triangles can be divided into three major groups, depending on their 
angles. The upper and lower lines of symmetrical triangles converge at the 
same angles. If the upper line is inclined 30 degrees to the horizontal, then 
the lower line is also inclined 30 degrees. Symmetrical triangles reflect a fair 
balance of power between bulls and bears and are more likely to serve as 
continuation patterns. 
An ascending triangle has a relatively flat upper boundary and a rising 
lower boundary. Its flat upper boundary shows that bulls are maintaining 
their strength and can lift prices to the same level, while bears are losing 
their ability to drive prices lower. An ascending triangle is more likely to 
result in an upside breakout. 
A descending triangle has a relatively flat lower boundary, while its upper 
boundary slants down. Its flat lower boundary shows that bears are maintain - 
ing their strength and continue to drive prices down, while bulls are losing 
their capacity to lift prices. A descending triangle is more likely to lead to a 
downside breakout. 
23. CHART PATTERNS 111 
Volume tends to shrink as triangles get older. If volume jumps on a rally 
toward the upper boundary, an upside breakout is more likely. If volume 
becomes heavier when prices fall toward the lower boundary, a downside 
breakout is more likely. Valid breakouts are accompanied by a burst of vol- 
ume - at least 50 percent above the average for the past 5 days. " 
Jan Peb llar IPP 
hr Jun Jul 
hug Sep 
Figure 23-4. Triangles 
Each triangle is defined by two converging lines. The upper line con- 
nects two or more peaks, and the lower line connects two or more bot - 
toms. 
A triangle whose lower boundary is rising is called an ascending tri- 
angle (marked Asc T on the chart). It tells you to expect an upside break - 
out. A descending triangle (Desc T) has a declining upper boundary. It 
shows that prices are more likely to break down. A symmetrical triangle 
(Symm T) shows that the forces of bulls and bears are evenly matched 
and the trend is likely to continue. 
Valid breakouts tend to occur during the first two thirds of a triangle's 
length. Sometimes prices pull back to a triangle after a breakout. Those 
pullbacks offer excellent entry points into trades in the direction of the 
breakout. Nikkei Dow .. 
.. 
t, .. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 28888 
27222 
26444 
25667 
24889 
24111 
23333 
22556 
21778 
21888 
112 CLASSICAL CHART ANALYSIS 
Valid breakouts occur during the first two thirds of a triangle. It is better 
not to trade breakouts from the last third of a triangle. If prices stagnate all 
the way into the apex, they are likely to remain flat. A triangle is like a fight 
between two tired boxers who keep leaning on each other. An early breakout 
shows that one of the fighters is stronger. If prices stay within a triangle all 
the way into the apex, that shows that both boxers are exhausted and no 
trend is likely to emerge. 
Charts of related markets often show triangles at the same time. If gold, 
silver, and platinum all trace triangles and gold breaks out to the upside, then 
platinum and silver are likely to follow. This approach works well with cur - 
rencies, especially with closely related ones, such as the German Mark and 
Swiss Franc. It also works with stocks in the same group-compare General 
Motors to Ford but not to IBM. 
Triangles provide a minimum target for a move following a breakout. 
Measure the height of a triangle at its base and project vertically from the 
point where the triangle was broken. If you are dealing with a small triangle 
in the midst of a dynamic trend, that minimum measurement is likely to be 
exceeded. You can also use the Fibonacci projections mentioned earlier. 
Trading Rules 
It's better not to trade minor swings within a triangle unless that triangle is 
very large. As a triangle grows older, the swings become narrower. Profit 
potential shrinks, while slippage and commissions continue to take just as 
bad a bite from your account as before. 
1. If you trade inside a triangle, use oscillators such as Stochastic (see 
Section 30) and Elder-ray (see Section 41). They can help you catch 
minor swings. 
2. In trying to decide whether a triangle on a daily chart is likely to lead 
to an upside or a downside breakout, look at the weekly chart (see 
Section 43). If the weekly trend is up, then a triangle on the daily 
charts is more likely to break out to the upside, and vice versa. 
3. When you want to buy an upside breakout, place a buy order slightly 
above the upper boundary of a triangle. Keep lowering your order as 
the triangle becomes narrower. If you want to short a downside break - 
23. CHART PATTERNS 113 
out, place a sell order slightly below the lower boundary. Keep raising 
it as the triangle becomes narrower. Once you are in a trade, place a 
protective stop slightly inside the triangle. Prices may pull back to the 
wall, but they should not return deep inside a triangle following a 
valid breakout. 
4. When a breakout from a triangle is followed by a pullback, pay atten - 
tion to volume. A pullback on heavy volume threatens to abort the 
breakout, but a pullback on light volume offers a good opportunity to 
add to your position. 
5. When prices approach the last third of a triangle, cancel your buy or 
sell orders. Breakouts from the last third of a triangle are very unreli - 
able. 
Atypical Triangles 
A pennant is a small triangle whose lines are slanted in the same direction. 
Pennants that slant against the trend serve as continuation patterns. There is 
an old saying "The pennant flies at half-mast9'-a rally is likely to travel as 
far after the pennant as it did before. A pennant that slants in the direction of 
the trend indicates exhaustion - a trend is nearing a reversal. 
A widening triangle occurs when prices set a series of higher highs and 
lower lows. This pattern shows that the market is becoming hysterically 
volatile, with bulls and bears pouring in. The fight between bulls and bears 
becomes too hot for the uptrend to continue-a widening triangle kills an 
uptrend. 
A diamond starts out as a widening triangle and ends as a symmetrical 
triangle. You have to squint very hard to recognize it. Diamonds are prime 
examples of Rorschach -type patterns for chartists. If you look long enough, 
you will find them, but their trading usefulness is minimal. I used to look for 
diamonds . . . and most of them were fake zirconium. 
Double Tops and Bottoms 
Double tops occur when prices rally to the area of the previous high. Double 
bottoms occur when prices fall near the previous low. The second top or bot- 
114 CLASSICAL CHART ANALYSIS 
tom can be slightly above or below the first. This often confuses beginning 
analysts. 
Savvy traders use technical indicators to identify double tops and bottoms. 
They are often marked by bullish and bearish divergences. Buying at double 
bottoms and selling short at double tops offer some of the best trading oppor - 
tunities. 
Computerized Technical 
Analysis 
