25. MOVING AVERAGES 
Wall Street old -timers claim that moving averages were brought to the finan- 
cial markets by antiaircraft gunners. They used moving averages to site guns 
25. MOVING AVERAGES 121 
on enemy planes during World War 11 and applied this method to prices. The 
two early experts on moving averages were Richard Donchian and J. M. 
Hurst-neither apparently a gunner. Donchian was a Merrill Lynch 
employee who developed trading methods based on moving average 
crossovers. Hurst was an engineer who applied moving averages to stocks in 
his now-classic book, The Profit Magic of Stock Transaction Timing. 
A moving average (MA) shows the average value of data in its time win - 
dow. A 5-day MA shows the average price for the past 5 days, a 20-day MA 
shows the average price for the past 20 days, and so on. When you connect 
each day's MA values, you create a moving average line. 
Simole MA = 
P1+p2t...+p~ 
where P is the price being averaged 
N is the number of days in the m6ving average (selected by trader) 
The value of MA depends on two factors: values that are being averaged and 
the width of the MA time window. Suppose you want to calculate a 3-day sim- 
ple moving average of a stock. If it closes at 19,21, and 20 on three consecutive 
days, then a 3-day simple MA of closing prices is 20 (19 + 21 + 20, divided by 
3). Suppose that on the fourth day the stock closes at 22. It makes its 3-day MA 
rise to 21 -the average of the last three days (21 + 20 + 22), divided by 3. 
There are three main types of moving averages: simple, exponential, and 
weighted. Most traders use simple 
 MAS because they are easy to calculate, 
and Donchian and Hurst used them in precomputer days. Simple MAS, how- 
ever, have a fatal flaw - they change twice in response to each price. 
Twice as Much Bark 
A simple MA changes twice in response to each piece of data. First, it 
changes when a new piece of data is added to the moving average. That is 
good-we want our MA to reflect changes in prices. The bad thing is that 
MA changes again when an old price is dropped off at the end of the moving 
average window. When a high price is dropped, a simple MA ticks down. 
When a low price is dropped, a simple MA rises. Those changes have noth - 
ing to do with the current reality of the market. 
Imagine that a stock hovers between 80 and 90, and its 10 -day simple MA 
stands at 85 but includes one day when the stock reached 105. When that 
high number is dropped at the end of the 10-day window, the MA dives, as if 
122 COMPUTERIZED TECHNICAL ANALYSIS 
in a downtrend. That meaningless dive has nothing to do with the current 
reality of the market. 
When an old piece of data gets dropped off, a simple moving average 
jumps. A simple MA is like a guard dog that barks twice - once when some - 
one approaches the house, and once again when someone walks away from 
it. You do not know when to believe that dog. Traders use simple 
 MAS out of 
inertia. A modem computerized trader is better off using exponential moving 
averages. 
Market Psychology 
Each price is a snapshot of the current mass consensus of value (see Section 
12). A single price does not tell you whether the crowd is bullish or bear- 
ish-just as a single photo does not tell you whether a person is an optimist 
or a pessimist. If, on the other hand, someone brings ten photos of a person 
to a lab and gets a composite picture, it will reveal that person's typical fea - 
tures. If you update a composite photo each day, you can monitor trends in 
that person's mood. 
A moving average is a composite photograph of the market - it combines 
prices for several days. The market consists of huge crowds, and a moving 
average identifies the direction of mass movement. 
The most important message of a moving average is the direction of its 
slope. When it rises, it shows that the crowd is becoming more 
 optimistic- 
bullish. When it falls, it shows that the crowd is becoming more pes- 
simistic- bearish. When the crowd is more bullish than before, prices rise 
above a moving average. When the crowd'is more bearish than before, prices 
fall below a moving average. 
Exponential Moving Averages 
An exponential moving average (EMA) is a better trend -following tool than 
a simple MA. It gives greater weight to the latest data and responds to 
changes faster than a simple MA. At the same time, an EMA does not jump 
in response to old data. This guard dog has better ears, and it barks only 
when someone approaches the house. 
25. MOVING AVERAGES 
EMA = Ptod K + 
EMAyest (1 - K) 
,5 
where K = 
N+ 1 
N = the number of days in the EMA (chosen by the trader). 
Ptod = today's price. 
EMAyest = the EMA of yesterday. 
Technical analysis software allows you to select the EMA length and cal - 
culate it at a push of a key. To do it by hand, follow these steps: 
1. Choose the EMA length (see below). Let us say, we want a 10 -day 
EMA. 
2. Calculate the coefficient K for that length (see above). For example, if 
you want a 10 -day EMA, K equals 2 divided by 10 + 1, or 0.18. 
3. Calculate a simple MA for the first 10 days-add closing prices and 
divide the sum by 10. 
4. On the 11th day, multiply the closing price by K, multiply the previous 
day's MA by (1 - K), and add the two. The result is the 10 -day EMA. 
5. Keep repeating step 4 on each subsequent day to obtain the latest 
EMA (see worksheet, Figure 25-1). 
An EMA has two major advantages over a simple MA. First, it assigns 
greater weight to the last trading day. The latest mood of the crowd is more 
important. In a 10 -day EMA, the last closing price is responsible for 18 per- 
cent of EMA value, while in a simple MA all days are equal. Second, EMA 
does not drop old data the way a simple MA does. Old data slowly fades 
away, like a mood of the past lingering in a composite photo. 
Choosing the Length of a Moving Average 
A relatively short EMA is more sensitive to price changes-it allows you to 
catch new trends sooner. It also changes its direction more often and produces 
more whipsaws. A whipsaw is a rapid reversal of a trading signal. A relatively 
long EMA leads to fewer whipsaws but misses turning points by a wider margin. 
124 COMPUTERIZED TECHNICAL ANALYSIS 
Gold 
Figure 25-1. Ten-Day EMA Worksheet 
Begin by calculating a simple moving average. The first value in column 
3 is a simple MA. Then calculate an exponential moving average on 
each subsequent day, according to the formula provided in the chapter. 
Day 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
When computers first became available, traders crunched numbers to find 
the "best" moving averages for different markets. They found which MAS 
worked in the past-but it did not help them trade because markets kept 
changing. Our brokers do not let us trade the past. 
It pays to tie EMA length to a cycle if you can find it. A moving average 
should be half the length of the dominant market cycle (see Section 36). If 
you find a 22-day cycle, use an 11 -day moving average. If the cycle is 34 
days long, then use a 17-day moving average. Trouble is, cycles keep chang- 
ing their length and disappearing. Some traders use software such as MESA 
to look for valid cycles, but MESA shows that noise is greater than cycle 
amplitude most of the time. 
Finally, traders can fall back on a simple rule of thumb: The longer the Close 
447.3 
456.8 
451 .O 
452.5 
453.4 
455.5 
456.0 
454.7 
453.5 
456.5 
459.5 
465.2 
460.8 
460.8 10-EMA 
-- 
453.7 
454.8 
456.6 
457.4 458.0 
25. MOVING AVERAGES 125 
trend you are trying to catch, the longer the moving average you need. You 
need a bigger fishing rod to catch a bigger fish. A 200-day moving average 
works for long-term stock investors who want to ride major trends. Most 
traders can use an EMA between 10 and 20 days. A moving average should 
not be shorter than 8 days to avoid defeating its purpose as a trend-following 
tool. I have been using a 13-day exponential moving average for most of my 
trading in the past several years. 
Trading Rules 
A successful trader does not forecast the future - he monitors the market and 
manages his trading position (see Section 17). Moving averages help us to 
trade in the direction of the trend. The single most important message of a 
moving average is the direction of its slope. It shows the direction of the 
market's inertia. When an EMA rises, it is best to trade the market from the 
long side, and when it falls, it pays to trade from the short side (Figure 25-2). 
1. When an EMA rises, trade that market from the long side. Buy when 
prices dip near or slightly below the moving average. Once you are 
long, place a protective stop below the latest minor low and move the 
stop to the break -even point as soon as prices close above their EMA. 
2. When the EMA falls, trade that market from the short side. Sell short 
when prices rally toward or slightly above the EMA, and place a pro- 
tective stop above the latest minor high. Lower that stop to the break- 
even point as soon as prices close below their EMA. 
3. When the EMA goes flat and only wiggles a little, it identifies an aim - 
less, trendless market. Do not trade using a trend-following method. 
Mechanical Systems 
The old mechanical trading methods using moving averages usually had four 
steps: (1) Buy when the MA rises and prices close above it; (2) sell when 
prices close below the MA; (3) sell short when the MA declines and prices 
close below it; (4) cover shorts when prices close above the MA. This 
mechanical method works in trending markets but leads to whipsaws when 
markets go flat. 
Trying to filter out whipsaws with mechanical rules is self -defeating - fil- 
126 COMPUTERIZED TECHNICAL ANALYSIS 
Figure 25-2 Thirteen-Day Exponential Moving Average 
When the EMA rises, it shows that the trend is up and the market should 
be traded from the long side. The best time to buy is when prices return 
to their EMA-not when they are high above it. Those trades offer a better 
riswreward ratio. 
When the EMA declines, it shows that the trend is down and the mar- 
ket should be traded from the short side. It is best to sell when prices 
rally back to their EMA. When the EMA goes flat, as it did in December, 
it tells you that the market has stopped trending. Stop using a trend-fol- 
lowing method but continue to track this indicator, waiting for it to enter 
a trend. 
ters reduce profits as much as losses. An example of a filter is a rule that 
requires that prices close on the other side of MA not once, but twice, or that 
they penetrate MA by a certain margin. Mechanical filters reduce losses, but 
they also diminish the best feature of a moving average-its ability to lock 
onto a trend early. 
The favorite approach of Donchian, one of the originators of trading with 
moving averages, was to use crossovers of 4-, 9-, and 18-day 
MAS. Trading 
signals were given when all three MAS turned in the same direction. His 
26. MOVING AVERAGE CONVERGENCE -DIVERGENCE 127 
method, like other mechanical trading methods, only worked in strongly 
trending markets. 
A trader must accept that an EMA, like any other trading tool, has good 
and bad sides. Moving averages help you identify and follow trends, but they 
lead to whipsaws in trading ranges. We will look for an answer to this 
dilemma in Chapter 9 on the Triple Screen trading system. 
More on Moving Averages 
Moving averages serve as support and resistance zones. A rising MA tends 
to serve as a floor below prices, and a falling MA serves as a ceiling above 
them. That's why it pays to buy near a rising MA, and sell short near a 
falling MA. 
Moving averages can be applied to indicators as well as prices. Some 
traders use a 5-day moving average of volume. When volume falls below 
its 5-day MA, it shows reduced public interest in the minor trend, which is 
likely to reverse. When volume overshoots its MA, it shows strong public 
interest and confirms the price trend. 
The proper way to plot a simple moving average is to lag it behind prices 
by half its length. For example, a 10-day simple MA properly belongs in the 
middle of a 10-day period, and it should be plotted underneath the 5th or 6th 
day. An exponential moving average is more heavily weighted toward the 
latest data, and a 10-day EMA should be plotted underneath the 7th or 8th 
day. Most software packages allow you to lag a moving average. 
Moving averages can be based not only on closing prices but also on the 
mean between the high and the low. MAS of closing prices are used for 
daily analysis, but day -traders prefer to apply 
 MAS to median prices. 
An exponential moving average assigns greater weight to the latest day of 
trading, but a weighted moving average (WMA) allows you to assign any 
weight to any day, depending on what you deem important. WMAs are so 
complicated that traders are better off using EMAs. 
