26. MOVING AVERAGE CONVERGENCE-DIVERGENCE (MACD) AND MACD-HISTOGRAM 
Moving averages identify trends by filtering out daily price ripples. A more 
advanced indicator was constructed by Gerald Appel, an analyst and money 
128 COMPUTERIZED TECHNICAL ANALYSIS 
manager in New York. Moving Average Convergence -Divergence, or 
MACD for short, consists not of one, but three exponential moving averages. 
It appears on the charts as two lines whose crossovers give trading signals. 
How to Create MACD 
The original MACD indicator consists of two lines: a solid line (called the 
MACD line) and a dashed line (called the Signal line). The MACD line is 
made up of two exponential moving averages (EMAs). It responds to 
changes in prices relatively quickly. The Signal line is made up of the 
MACD line smoothed with another EMA. It responds to changes in prices 
more slowly. 
Buy and sell signals are given when the fast MACD line crosses above or 
below the slow Signal line. The MACD indicator is included in most pro- 
grams for technical analysis. Few traders calculate it by hand-a computer 
does the job faster and more accurately. 
To create MACD: 
1. Calculate a 12-day EMA of closing prices. 
2. Calculate a 26-day EMA of closing prices. 
3. Subtract the 26 -day EMA from the 12 -day EMA, and plot their differ - 
ence as a solid line. This is the fast MACD line. 
4. Calculate a 9-day EMA of the fast line, and plot the result as a dashed 
line. This is the slow Signal line (see the worksheet, Figure 26-1). 
Market Psychology 
Each price reflects the consensus of value among the mass of market partici - 
pants at the moment of the trade. A moving average represents an average 
consensus of value in a selected period - a composite photo of mass consen - 
sus. A long moving average tracks long -term consensus, and a short moving 
average tracks short -term consensus. 
Crossovers of the MACD and Signal lines identify shifts in the balance of 
power of bulls and bears. The fast MACD line reflects mass consensus over 
a shorter period. The slow Signal line reflects mass consensus over a longer 
period. When the fast MACD line rises above the slow Signal line, it shows 
26. MOVING AVERAGE CONVERGENCE -DIVERGENCE 129 
Crude Oil 
DAY 
1 CLOSE 
i 12-EMA i 26-EMA 
i MACD 
i SIGNAL MACD-HIST 
1 I 20.70 i 20.39 1 20.46 
i 4.07 i -0.16 i 0.09 
- 
.....a .... 
9 1 21.23 
 1 20.95 
i 20.76 i 0.19 
i 0.07 
i 0.12 
Figure 26-1, MACD and MACD-Histogram Worksheet 
To obtain MACD lines and an MACD-Histogram take these steps: 
1. Calculate the 12 -day and 26-day exponential moving averages of 
closing prices. 
2. Subtract the 26-day EMA from the 12-day EMA to obtain the fast 
MACD line. 
3. Calculate a 
%day EMA of the. fast MACD line to obtain the slow 
Signal line. Plot both lines to obtain the classic MACD indicator. 
4. Subtract the Signal line from the MACD line to obtain an MACD- 
Histogram. 
that bulls dominate the market, and it is better to trade from the long side. 
When the fast line falls below the slow line, it shows that bears dominate the 
market and it pays to trade from the short side. 
Trading Rules 
Crossovers between the MACD and Signal lines identify changing market 
tides. Trading in the direction of a crossover means going with the flow of 
the market. This system generates fewer trades and whipsaws than a 
mechanical system based on a single moving average. 
1. When the fast MACD line crosses above the slow Signal line, it gives 
a buy signal. Go long, and place a protective stop below the latest 
minor low. 
130 COMPUTERIZED TECHNICAL ANALYSIS 
Jiul 
Figure 26-2. MACD Lines 
When the fast MACD line crosses above the slow Signal line, it 
gives a buy signal. Sell signals are given when the fast line crosses 
below the slow line. These rules help catch all the major trends 
and generate fewer whipsaws than crossovers of prices and a sin - 
gle moving average. 
2. When the fast line crosses below the slow line, it gives a sell signal. 
Go short, and place a protective stop above the latest minor high 
(Figure 26 -2). 
More on MACD 
Many traders try to optimize MACD by using other moving averages than 
the standard 12 -, 26-, and 9-bar EMAs; 5-34-7 is another popular choice. 
Some traders try to link MACD to market cycles. The trouble is cycles are 
not present in the markets most of the time (see Section 36). If you use 
cycles, the first EMA should be one quarter the length of the dominant cycle 
and the second EMA half the cycle length. The third EMA is a smoothing 
device whose length does not have to be tied to a cycle. Beware of optimiz- 
26. MOVING AVERAGE CONVERGENCE -DIVERGENCE 131 
ing MACD too often. If you fiddle with MACD long enough, you can make 
it give you any signal you want using the same data. 
A "quick-and-dirty" way to plot MACD is used by traders whose soft - 
ware does not include this indicator. Some packages allow you to draw only 
two EMAs. In that case, you can use crossovers between two EMAs, such as 
11-day and 26-day EMAs as a proxy for MACD and Signal lines. 
MACD-Histogram offers a deeper insight into the balance of power between 
bulls and bears than the original MACD. It shows not only whether bulls or 
bears are in control but also whether they are growing stronger or weaker. It 
is one of the best tools available to a market technician. 
MACD-Histogram = MACD line - Signal line 
MACD-Histogram measures the difference between the MACD line and 
the Signal line (see worksheet, Figure 26-1). It plots that difference as a his- 
togram - a series of vertical bars. That distance may appear puny, but a corn- 
puter rescales it to fill the screen. 
If the fast line is above the slow line, MACD -Histogram is positive and 
plotted above the zero line. If the fast line is below the slow line, MACD - 
Histogram is negative and plotted below the zero line. When the two lines 
touch, MACD -Histogram equals zero. 
When the spread between the MACD and Signal lines increases, MACD - 
Histogram becomes taller or deeper, depending on its direction. When the 
two lines draw closer, MACD -Histogram becomes shorter. 
The slope of MACD-Histogram is defined by the relationship between 
any two neighboring bars. If the last bar is higher (like the height of letters 
m-M), the slope of MACD-Histogram is up. If the last bar is lower (like the 
depth of letters P-p), then the slope of MACD-Histogram is down. 
Market Psychology 
MACD-Histogram shows the difference between long -term and short -term 
consensus of value. The fast MACD line reflects market consensus over a 
shorter period. The slow Signal line reflects market consensus over a longer 
period. MACD -Histogram tracks the difference between these two lines. 
132 COMPUTERIZED TECHNICAL ANALYSIS 
The slope of MACD-Histogram identifies the dominant market group. A 
rising MACD -Histogram shows that bulls are becoming stronger. A falling 
MACD-Histogram shows that bears are becoming stronger. 
When the fast MACD line rallies faster than the slow Signal line, MACD - 
Histogram rises. It shows that bulls are becoming stronger than they have 
been - it is a good time to trade from the long side. When the fast MACD 
line drops faster than the slow line, MACD -Histogram falls. It shows that 
bears are becoming stronger - it is a good time to trade from the short side. 
When the slope of MACD-Histogram moves in the same direction as 
prices, the trend is safe. When the slope of MACD-Histogram moves in a 
direction opposite to that of prices, the health of the trend is questioned. It is 
best to trade in the direction of the slope of MACD -Histogram because it 
shows whether bulls or bears dominate the market. 
The slope of MACD-Histogram is more important than its position above 
or below the centerline. The best sell signals are given when MACD- 
Histogram is above its centerline but its slope turns down, showing that bulls 
have become exhausted. The best buy signals occur when MACD -Histogram 
is below its centerline but its slope turns up, showing that bears have become 
exhausted. 
Trading Rules 
MACD-Histogram gives two types of trading signals. One is common and 
occurs at every price bar. The other is rare and occurs only a few times a 
year in any market - but it is extremely strong. 
The common signal is given by the slope of MACD-Histogram (Figure 
26-3). When the current bar is higher than the preceding bar, the slope is up. 
It shows that bulls are in control and it is time to buy. When the current bar is 
lower than the preceding bar, the slope is down. It shows that bears are in 
control and it is time to be short. When prices go one way but MACD- 
Histogram moves the other way, it shows that the dominant crowd is losing 
its enthusiasm and the trend is weaker than it appears. 
1. Buy when MACD-Histogram stops falling and ticks up. Place a pro- 
tective stop below the latest minor low. 
2. Sell short when MACD-Histogram stops rising and ticks down. Place 
a protective stop above the latest minor high. 
MACD-Histogram ticks up and down on the daily charts so often that is 
26. MOVING AVERAGE CONVERGENCE -DIVERGENCE 133 
Figure 26-3. MACD-Histogram Divergences 
MACD-Histogram confirms trends when it reaches new highs or lows 
together with prices. The new lows in MACD-Histogram at points A and 
F confirm downtrends. New lows in the indicator tell traders that the 
downtrend is likely to retest or exceed bottoms A and F. New highs C 
and D in MACD-Histogram confirm uptrends. They show that the 
uptrend is likely to retest or exceed peaks C and D. 
Divergences between MACD-Histogram and prices identify major 
turning points. These signals rarely occur, but when .they do, they often 
let you catch major reversals and the beginnings of new trends. The 
bullish divergence A-B flags a major buying opportunity. Prices are at a 
new low, but the indicator is tracing a higher bottom. It shows that bears 
are exhausted and bulls are ready to gain the upper hand. 
The bearish divergence D-E identifies a major selling opportunity. At 
the right edge of the chart, there is a bullish divergence, F-G. The best 
time to buy is when MACD -Histogram ticks up from its second bottom, 
G. Once you go long, place a protective stop below the price bottom G. 
Move the stop up as the trend progresses. 
not practical to buy and sell every time it turns. The changes of slope of 
MACD-Histograms are much more meaningful on the weekly charts, which 
is why it is included in the Triple Screen trading system (see Section 43). 
134 COMPUTERIZED TECHNICAL ANALYSIS 
When to Expect a New Peak or Valley 
MACD-Histogram works like headlights on a car - it gives traders a glimpse 
of the road ahead. New highs and lows in this indicator are usually followed 
by new high or low prices. 
A record peak for the past three months in daily MACD -Histogram shows 
that bulls are very strong and prices are likely to rise even higher. A record 
new low for MACD -Histogram for the past three months shows that lower 
prices are likely ahead. 
When MACD -Histogram reaches a new high during a rally, the uptrend is 
healthy and you can expect the next rally to retest or exceed its previous 
peak. If MACD-Histogram falls to a new low during a downtrend, it shows 
that bears are strong and prices are likely to retest or exceed their latest low. 
The Strongest Signal in Technical Analysis 
Divergences between MACD -Histogram and prices occur only a few times a 
year in any given market, but they give some of the most powerful messages 
in technical analysis. These divergences identify major turning points and 
give "extra-strength" buy or sell signals. They do not occur at every impor - 
tant top and bottom, but when you see one, you know that a major reversal is 
probably at hand. 
When prices rally to a new high, but MACD -Histogram traces a lower 
top, it creates a bearish divergence (Figure 26-3). A lower top in MACD- 
Histogram shows that bulls are internally weak even though prices are 
higher. When bulls are running out of steam, bears are ready to grab control. 
Bearish divergences between MACD -Histogram and prices identify weak- 
ness at market tops. They give sell signals when most traders feel excited 
about a breakout to a new high! 
3. Sell short when MACD -Histogram ticks down from its second, lower 
top, while prices are at a new high. Place a protective stop above the 
latest high. 
As long as prices keep falling to new lows and MACD -Histogram keeps 
going lower, it confirms the downtrend. If prices fall to a new low but 
MACD-Histogram traces a more shallow low, it creates a bullish divergence. 
It shows that prices are falling out of inertia, bears are weaker than they 
seem, and bulls are ready to gain control. Bullish divergences between 
27. THE DIRECTIONAL SYSTEM 135 
MACD-Histogram and prices identify strength at market bottoms. They give 
buy signals when most traders feel fearful about a breakdown to a new low! 
4. Buy when MACD -Histogram ticks up from its second, more shallow 
bottom while prices are at a new low. Place a protective stop below the 
latest low. 
If a bullish divergence between MACD -Histogram and price is aborted 
and prices fall to a new low, you will be stopped out. Continue to watch 
MACD-Histogram. If it traces a more shallow third bottom while prices 
decline to a new low, you are dealing with a "triple bullish divergence9'-an 
especially strong buy signal. Buy again as soon as MACD-Histogram ticks 
up from its shallow third bottom. The reverse applies to shorting triple bear - 
ish divergences. 
More on MACD-Histogram 
MACD-Histogram works in any timeframe: weekly, daily, and intraday. The 
signals of weekly MACD-Histogram lead to greater price moves than the 
daily or intraday indicators. This principle applies to all indicators - signals 
in longer timeframes lead to greater price moves. 
When you use MACD and MACD -Histogram on the weekly charts, you 
do not have to wait until Friday to get your signals. A major trend can 
change in the middle of the week - the market does not watch the calendar. 
Because of this, weekly studies have to be performed each day. 
