28. MOMENTUM, RATE OF CHANGE, AND SMOOTHED RATE OF CHANGE 
When greed or fear grips a mass of traders, the crowd surges. Oscillators 
measure the speed of that surge and track its momentum. 
Technical indicators are divided into three main groups. Trend -following 
indicators help identify trends. Oscillators help find turning points. 
Miscellaneous indicators, such as the New High-New Low Index, track gen - 
eral changes in mass psychology. 
Oscillators identify the emotional extremes of market crowds. They allow 
you to find unsustainable levels of optimism and pessimism. Professionals 
tend to fade those extremes. They bet against them, for a return to normalcy. 
When the market rises and the crowd gets up on its hind legs and roars from 
greed, professionals sell short. They buy when the market falls and the 
crowd howls in fear. Oscillators help them to time those trades. 
Overbought and Oversold 
Martin Pring compares trend -following indicators and oscillators to the foot - 
prints of a man walking his dog on a leash. The man leaves a fairly straight 
trail - like a trend -following indicator. The dog's trail swings right and left as 
far as the leash allows - like an oscillator. When the dog reaches the end of 
its leash, it is likely to turn and run the other way. 
You can follow the trail of a man to find the trend of the pair. When the 
dog deviates from that trail by the length of its leash, it usually turns around. 
Usually, but not always. If a dog sees a cat or a rabbit, it may become excited 
enough to pull its owner off his trail. Traders need to use judgment when 
using oscillator signals. 
An oscillator becomes overbought when it reaches a high level associated 
with tops in the past. Overbought means too high, ready to turn down. An 
oscillator becomes oversold when it reaches a low level associated with bot- 
toms in the past. Oversold means too low, ready to turn up. 
Overbought and oversold levels are marked by horizontal reference lines 
on the charts. The proper way to draw those lines is to place them so that an 
oscillator spends only about 5 percent of its time beyond each line. Place 
overbought and oversold lines so that they cut across only the highest peaks 
and the lowest valleys of an oscillator for the past six months. Readjust these 
lines once every three months. 
28. MOMENTUM 143 
When an oscillator rises or falls beyond its reference line, it helps a trader 
to pick a top or a bottom. Oscillators work spectacularly well in trading 
ranges, but they give premature and dangerous trading signals when a new 
trend erupts from a range. When a strong trend begins, oscillators start acting 
like a dog that pulls its owner off his path. 
An oscillator can stay overbought for weeks at a time when a new, strong 
uptrend begins, giving premature sell signals. It can stay oversold for weeks 
in a steep downtrend, giving premature buy signals. Knowing when to use 
oscillators and when to rely on trend-following indicators is a hallmark of a 
mature analyst (see Section 43). 
Types of Divergences 
Oscillators, as well as other indicators, give their best trading signals when 
they diverge from prices. Bullish divergences occur when prices fall to a new 
low while an oscillator refuses to decline to a new low. They show that bears 
are losing power, prices are falling out of inertia, and bulls are ready to seize 
control. Bullish divergences often mark the ends of downtrends. 
Bearish divergences occur in uptrends- they identify market tops. They 
emerge when prices rally to a new high while an oscillator refuses to rise to a 
new peak. A bearish divergence shows that bulls are running out of steam, 
prices are rising out of inertia, and bears are ready to take control. 
There are three classes of bullish and bearish divergences (Figure 28-1). 
Class A divergences identify important turning points - the best trading 
opportunities. Class B divergences are less strong, and class C divergences 
are least important. Valid divergences are clearly visible - they seem to jump 
from the charts. If you need a ruler to tell whether there is a divergence, 
assume there is none. 
Class A bearish divergences occur when prices reach a new high but an 
oscillator reaches a lower high than it did on a previous rally. Class A bear- 
ish divergences usually lead to sharp breaks. Class A bullish divergences 
occur when prices reach a new low but an oscillator traces a higher bottom 
than during its previous decline. They often precede sharp rallies. 
Class B bearish divergences occur when prices make a double top but an 
oscillator traces a lower second top. Class B bullish divergences occur when 
prices make a double bottom but an oscillator traces a higher second bottom. 
Class C bearish divergences occur when prices rise to a new high but an 
indicator stops at the same level it reached during the previous rally. It shows 
144 COMPUTERIZED TECHNICAL ANALYSIS 
PRICE 
~kb 
- - - - - - - - 
- 
- 
- 
ln~umn 
!a 
DnrowiDla 
Cuss A Cuss A 
BEARW Buwvl 
Figure 28-1. Types of Divergences 
Divergences between prices and indicators give some of the most pow- 
erful signals in technical analysis. Divergences are defined by the differ- 
ences in height or depth of prices and indicators. 
Class A bearish divergence -prices reach a new peak while an indicator 
reaches a lower peak. This is the strongest sell signal. 
Class A bullish divergence-prices fall to a new low while an indicator 
stops at a more shallow low than before. This is the 
strongest buy signal. 
Class B bearish divergence -prices trace a double top while an indicator 
reaches a lower peak. This is the second strongest sell 
signal. 
Class B bullish divergence-prices trace a double bottom while an indica- 
tor traces a higher second bottom. This is the second 
strongest buy signal. 
Class C bearish divergence -prices reach a new peak while an indicator 
traces a double top. This is the weakest bearish diver- 
gence. 
Class C bullish divergence-prices fall to a new low while an indicator 
makes a double bottom. This is the weakest bullish 
divergence. 
Ph 5 
-- 
- 
- 
- 
- - 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
4bPbPb 
 tl 
Cuss B Cuss B 
BEN~W &LUSH 
P'kb 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
CussC Cuss C 
Bww Buwvl 
28. MOMENTUM 145 
that bulls are becoming neither stronger nor weaker. Class C bullish diver - 
gences occur when prices fall to a new low but the indicator traces a double 
bottom. 
Class A divergences almost always identify good trades. Class B and C 
divergences more often lead to whipsaws. It is best to ignore them, unless 
they are strongly confirmed by other indicators. 
Triple Bullish or Bearish Divergences consist of three price bottoms and 
three oscillator bottoms or three price tops and three oscillator tops. They are 
even stronger than regular divergences. In order for a triple divergence to 
occur, a regular bullish or bearish divergence first has to abort. That's 
another good reason to practice tight money management! If you lose only a 
little on a whipsaw, you will not suffer-and you will have both the money 
and psychological strength to re-enter a trade. 
Momentum and Rate of Change 
Momentum and Rate of Change measure trend acceleration - its gain or loss 
of speed. These leading indicators show when a trend speeds up, slows 
down, or maintains its rate of progress. They usually reach a peak before the 
trend reaches its high and reach a bottom before prices hit their low. 
As long as oscillators keep reaching new highs, it is safe to hold long 
positions. As long as they keep reaching new lows, it is safe to hold short 
positions. When an oscillator reaches a new high, it shows that an uptrend 
is gaining speed and is likely to continue. When an oscillator traces a lower 
peak, it shows that an uptrend has stopped accelerating, like a rocket that 
has run out of fuel. When it flies only because of inertia, you have to get 
ready for a reversal. The same reasoning applies to oscillator lows in 
downtrends. 
Momentum and Rate of Change compare today's closing price to a price a 
selected period of time ago. Momentum subtracts a past price from today's 
price; Rate of Change divides today's price by a past price. 
where M = Momentum. 
ROC = Rate of Change. 
Ptod = Today's closing price. 
Ptod 
- = Closing price n days ago (chosen by trader). 
146 COMPUTERIZED TECHNICAL ANALYSIS 
For example, a 7 -day Momentum of closing prices equals today's closing 
price minus the closing price 7 days ago. Momentum is positive if today's 
price is higher, negative if today's price is lower, and at zero if today's price 
equals the price of 7 days ago. The slope of the line connecting momentum 
values for each day shows whether momentum is rising or falling. 
A 7-day Rate of Change (ROC) divides the latest price by the closing 
price 7 days ago. If they are equal, ROC equals 1. If today's price is higher, 
then ROC is greater than 1, and if today's price is lower, then ROC is less 
than 1. The slope of the line that connects values for each day shows whether 
Rate of Change is rising or falling (see worksheet, Figure 28 -2). 
A trader must choose the width of the time window for Momentum or 
ROC. As a rule of thumb, it pays to keep oscillator windows fairly narrow. 
Use wide windows for trend -following indicators whose goal it is to catch 
trends. Use narrow windows for oscillators to detect short-term changes in 
the markets. 
Momentum and ROC share a flaw with simple moving averages - they 
jump twice in response to each piece of data. They react to each new price, 
and they jump again when that piece of data leaves the oscillator's window. 
Smoothed Rate of Change takes care of this problem. 
Crowd Psychology 
Each price reflects the consensus of value of all market participants at the 
moment of transaction. Momentum and ROC compare today's price (today's 
consensus of value) to a previous price (an earlier consensus of value). They 
measure changes in mass optimism or pessimism. 
To find out whether a child is growing fast enough, you can measure his 
height each month and compare it with his height six months ago. Then you 
find out whether your child is growing normally, growing so slowly that you 
should take him to a doctor, or growing fast enough to think about applying 
for a basketball scholarship. Momentum and ROC tell you whether a trend is 
accelerating, slowing down, or moving at the same speed. 
When Momentum or ROC rises to a new peak, it shows that the optimism 
of the market crowd is growing, and prices are likely to rally higher. When 
Momentum or ROC falls to a new low, it shows that the pessimism of the 
market crowd is increasing, and lower prices are likely ahead. 
When prices rise but Momentum or ROC falls, it warns you that a top is 
near-it is time to think of taking profits on long positions or tightening 
stops. If prices reach a new high but Momentum or ROC reaches a lower top, 
28. MOMENTUM 147 
Crude Oil 
-- 
Figure 28-2. Momentum, Rate of Change, and Smoothed Rate 
of Change Worksheet , Date 
1 Close i Mtm:7 
I RoC:7 
 j 13-EMA 
I S-ROC 13/21 
- 
6/19 
1 19.91 i -0.18 
[ 99.10 20.33 96.07 
6/20 
1 20.17 i -0.03 
1 99.85 ] 20.30 
 1 95.94 
Momentum (Mtm:7) is today's closing price minus the closing price 7 
days ago. 
Rate of Change (RoC:7) is today's closing price divided by the closing 
price 7 days ago. 
You can use closing prices for the day in these formulas or median 
prices (high plus low, divided by two). This also applies to most indica- 
tors described in this book. it is 
OK to use time windows that are wider 
or narrower than 7 days. 
To create a Smoothed Rate of Change (S-ROC 13/21 ), calculate a 13- 
day exponential moving average of closing prices and apply a 21-day 
Rate of Change to it. ...... 96.04 
 99:51 ...... 1 .... 
.20:.29 '. ............................... 
99.95 1 20.25 
1 95.90 
 .............................................. ............................... 
100.50 2023 95.72 4 .......... : ......................................... 6/21 ........................... 
6/24 
6/25 202, ...... i ...... 
3:10 
........... 
20.00 i -0.01 ................................................................... 
20.10 i 0.10 ........................................................................................ 
, 6/26 20.09 
i -0.04 99.80 
i 20.21 f. 95.49 
, 6/27 ) 20.46 
i 0.36 
i 101.79 
! 20.24 [ 95.66 
, 6/28 
1 20.53 
i 0.62 
1 103.11 
! 20.29 ! 95.67 
7/01 
1 20.65 
 i 0.48 
1 102.38 
 1 20.34 1 95.88 
- 
102.13 f 20.77 100.14 
7/12 21.48 
i 0.78 1103.77 
 1 20.87 [ 100.93 
101.65 
 103:31 ........... 20.92 
..................................... 
103.14 
! 20.99 * ........................... " .."" .................. 102.37 103.21 
103:'1 .....; ..... 
!?.I.:!.!! ...................................... 
102.65 21.18 103.85 711 5 ............................................ 
711 6 
711 7 ........................... 
711 8 21.23 
 : i ..... 
O:S!! ........... 
21.37 
! 0.65 ........................................................................................ 
.??!.:.el ...... i ...... 
0:3! ........... 
21.66 i 0.56 
COMPUTERIZED TECHNICAL ANALYSIS 
that bearish divergence gives a strong sell signal. The reverse holds true in 
downtrends. 
There are times when Momentum and ROC act not as leading but as coin- 
cident indicators. Think what happens to a rocket when it hits an overhead 
obstacle. Its speed and momentum stop rising and fall together as the rocket 
crashes. This happens in the markets when the crowd gets hit by a major 
piece of bad news and this "overhead obstacle " sends ROC and prices down 
together. 
Trading Rules 
Leading indicators are like brake lights on a car ahead of you on a highway. 
When they light up, you do not know whether the other driver is tapping his 
breaks or slamming them. You have to be extra careful putting on trades 
using leading indicators (Figure 28-3). 
1. When the trend is up, buy whenever ROC declines below its centerline 
and ticks up. It shows that the uptrend has slowed down -like a train 
that slows down to pick up passengers. When the trend is down, sell 
short whenever ROC rallies above its centerline and ticks down. 
2. If you hold a long position and prices begin to slide, see whether ROC 
has reached a record peak before this pullback. A new peak in ROC 
shows a high level of bullish energy, which is likely to lift the market 
to its previous high or higher. Then it is relatively safe to hold long 
positions. On the other hand, a series of declining peaks in ROC is a 
sign of weakness-it is better to sell immediately. Reverse this 
approach in downtrends. 
3. A break in a trendline of Momentum or ROC often precedes a break of 
a price trendline by a day or two. When you see a leading indicator 
break a trendline, prepare for a break in the price trend. 
Smoothed Rate of Change 
This oscillator, developed by Fred G. Schutzman, avoids the major flaw of 
ROC. It responds to each piece of data only once rather than twice. Smoothed 
Rate of Change (S-ROC) compares the values of an exponential moving 
average (EMA) instead of prices at two points in time. It gives fewer trading 
signals, and the quality of these signals is better. 
28. MOMENTUM 149 
Figure 28-3. Seven-day Momentum (Mtm:7) and Rate of 
Change (RoC:7) 
When Momentum or ROC rises, it shows that a rally is accelerating. 
When it falls, it shows that a decline is accelerating. Peaks and bottoms 
of these indicators show when a trend has reached its maximum speed. 
Once Momentum or ROC turns, it is time to begin a countdown to a 
reversal. These indicators give their best signals when they diverge from 
prices (as marked by arrows on the chart). 
Momentum and ROC can be analyzed using classical charting meth - 
ods, which often give leading trading signals. Notice how ROC and 
Momentum have sliced through their resistance in August, several days 
prior to a price breakout. At the right edge of the chart, a bearish diver- 
gence shows that the uptrend has run out of steam. It is time to take prof- 
its on long positions and go short, with a protective stop a few ticks 
above the September top. 
150 COMPUTERIZED TECHNICAL ANALYSIS 
To create S-ROC you must first calculate an exponential moving average 
of closing prices (see Section 25). The next step is to apply Rate of Change 
to the EMA. S-ROC is not very sensitive to the length of its EMA or ROC 
parts. You can calculate a 13 -day EMA of closing prices and then apply a 
21-day Rate of Change to it (see worksheet, Figure 28-2). 
Some traders calculate the Rate of Change of prices first and then smooth 
it with a moving average. Their method produces a much jumpier indicator, 
which is less useful than S-ROC. 
Crowd Behavior 
An exponential moving average reflects the average consensus of value of 
all market participants during the period of its window. It is like a composite 
photograph that reflects major features of the market crowd rather than its 
fleeting moods. 
S-ROC compares each reading of an EMA to a past reading from your 
selected period of time. It compares the average mass consensus today to the 
average consensus in the past. S-ROC tracks major shifts in the bullishness 
and bearishness of the market crowd. 
Trading Rules 
Changes in the direction of S-ROC often identify important market turns. 
Upturns of S-ROC mark significant bottoms, and its downturns mark impor - 
tant tops (Figure 28-4). Divergences between S-ROC and prices give espe- 
cially strong buy and sell signals. 
1. Buy when S-ROC turns up from below its centerline. 
2. Sell when S-ROC stops rising and turns down. Sell short when S-ROC 
turns down from above its centerline. 
3. If prices reach a new high but S-ROC traces a lower peak, it shows that 
the market crowd is less enthusiastic even though prices are higher. A 
bearish divergence between S-ROC and price gives a strong signal to 
sell short. 
4. If prices fall to a new low but S-ROC traces a higher bottom, it shows 
that the market crowd is less fearful, even though prices are lower. It 
29. WILLIAMS %R 151 
.. 138 
Figure 28-4. Smoothed Rate of Change (S-ROC 13/21 ) 
To create this indicator, calculate a 13-day exponential moving average 
of closing prices and apply a 21-day Rate of Change to it. S-ROC usually 
flows in smooth waves whose crests and bottoms identify many impor- 
tant turning points. This indicator works especially well in the stock mar- 
ket, with stock groups as well as with individual stocks. 
shows that the downside pressure has lessened, even though the mar - 
ket has fallen deeper than before. A bullish divergence gives a strong 
signal to cover shorts and buy. 
