29. WILLIAMS %R 
Williams %R (Wm%R) is a simple but effective oscillator described by 
Larry Williams in 1973. It measures the capacity of bulls and bears to close 
prices each day near the edge of the recent range. Wm%R confirms trends 
and warns of their upcoming reversals. 
Hr - C 
Wm%R = 100 
Hr 
- Lr 
152 COMPUTERIZED TECHNICAL ANALYSIS 
where r = the time window selected by a trader, such as 7 days. 
H,= the highest high of the selected period (i.e., a 7-day high). 
L, = the lowest low of the selected period (i.e., a 7-day low). 
C = the latest close. 
Wm%R measures the placement of each closing price in relation to the 
recent high -low range. It expresses the distance from the highest high to the 
lowest low in its time window as 100 percent. It expresses the distance from 
the latest closing price to the top of that window as a percentage of the range 
in its window (see worksheet, Figure 29 -1). Williams %R is closely related 
to Stochastic (see Section 30). 
Wm%R is designed to fluctuate between 0 and 100 percent. It equals 0 
(plotted at the top of the chart) when bulls reach the peak of their power and 
close prices at the top of the range. It reaches 100 percent when bears are at 
the peak of their power and close prices at the bottom of the recent range. 
A rule of thumb with all oscillators -when in doubt,-make them shorter. 
This is the opposite of trend-following indicators-when in doubt make 
them longer. Oscillators with narrow windows help catch short -term rever - 
sals. If you work with cycles, make Wm%R equal half the cycle length. A 7- 
day window fits Wm%R fine. Wm%R works well with weekly charts-use 
a 7-week window. 
Horizontal reference lines for Wm%R are drawn at 10 percent and 90 per- 
cent levels. When Wm%R closes above its upper reference line, it shows 
that bulls are strong but the market is overbought. When Wm%R closes 
below its lower reference line, it shows that bears are strong but the market 
is oversold. 
Crowd Psychology 
Each price is a momentary consensus of value among all market participants. 
The high of the recent range shows how high bulls can lift prices - it reflects 
their maximum power. The low of the range reflects the maximum power of 
bears during that period. Closing price is the most important consensus of 
the day because the settlement of trading accounts depends on it. 
Wm%R compares each closing price to the recent range. It shows whether 
bulls can close the market near the top of the recent.range or bears can close 
the -market at the bottom of the range. Wm%R measures the balance of 
power between bulls and bears at closing time - the crucial money -counting 
time in the market. 
Bulls may push prices higher during the day, or bears may push them 
29. WILLIAMS %R 153 
Gold 
Figure 29-1. Williams 
 O/OR Worksheet 
Wm%R expresses the distance from the latest closing price to the top of 
the 7-day high-low range as a percentage of that range. Wm%R:7 is cal- 
culated here using a -/-day time window. You may choose a longer or a 
shorter window, depending on the trend you are trying to analyze. 
lower. Wm%R shows which group is capable of closing the market in its 
favor. If bulls cannot close the market near the top during a rally, they are 
weaker than they seem. This is a shorting opportunity. If bears cannot close 
the market near the lows during a decline, they are weaker than they appear. 
This is a buying opportunity. 
Trading Rules 
Wm%R gives three types of trading signals. They are, in order of impor- 
tance, bullish or bearish divergences, failure swings, and overbought -over- 
sold readings (Figure 29-2). 
154 COMPUTERIZED TECHNICAL ANALYSIS 
.. 370,3 
Figure 29-2. Seven-Day Williams %R (Wm%R:7) 
When Wm%R rises above its upper reference line, it shows that the mar- 
ket is overbought. When it falls below its lower reference line, it shows 
that the market is oversold. The best buy and sell signals are given by 
divergences (marked by arrows). A Class B bearish divergence in July 
gave a sell signal. A Class A bullish divergence in September gave a 
strong buy signal. 
Failure swings (marked by the letter F) occur when Wm%R reverses 
without reaching its reference line. This happens during reactions against 
very strong trends -failure swings confirm those trends. A failure swing 
during a downtrend in August gave a strong sell signal. A failure swing 
during an uptrend in September gave a strong buy signal. 
At the right edge of the chart, prices are surging. If Wm%R dips below 
its lower reference line, use that as a buying opportunity. Do not sell 
short unless a bearish divergence emerges. 
Divergences 
Divergences between prices and Wm%R rarely occur. They identify the best 
trading opportunities. When Wm%R rises above its upper reference line, 
falls, and then cannot rise above that line during the next rally, it creates a 
bearish divergence. It shows that bulls are losing their power and the market 
is likely to fall. A bullish divergence occurs when Wm%R falls below its 
lower reference line, rallies, and then cannot decline below that line when 
prices slide again. It shows that bears are losing power and a rally is in the 
offing. 
1. When you identify a bullish divergence, go long and place a protective 
stop below the recent price low. 
2. When you identify a bearish divergence, go short and place a protec - 
tive stop above the recent price high. 
Failure Swings 
Crowds tend to swing from one extreme to the other. Wm%R seldom 
reverses in the middle of its range. Failure swings occur when Wm%R fails 
to rise above its upper reference line during a rally or fall below its lower 
reference line during a decline. 
3. When Wm%R stops rising in the middle of a rally and turns down 
without reaching its upper reference line, it produces a failure swing. 
This shows that bulls are especially weak and gives a sell signal. 
4. When Wm%R stops falling in the middle of a decline and turns up 
without reaching its lower reference line, that is a failure swing. It 
shows that bears are very weak and gives a buy signal. 
Overbought and Oversold 
When prices close near the upper edge of their range, Wm%R reaches its top 
and becomes overbought. When prices close near the bottom of their recent 
range, Wm%R falls and becomes oversold. Neither bulls nor bears are all- 
powerful. They seldom can close prices near the extreme of the recent range 
for too many days in a row. 
5. When Wm%R rises above its upper reference line, it marks a potential 
market top and gives a sell signal. 
6. When Wm%R falls below its lower reference line, it marks a potential 
market bottom and gives a buy signal. 
These overbought and oversold signals tend to work well during flat trad - 
ing ranges. They become premature and dangerous when the market enters a 
156 COMPUTERIZED TECHNICAL ANALYSIS 
trend. Wm%R can stay near the top for a week or longer during a strong 
rally: Its overbought readings can identify strength rather than a shorting 
oppofiunity. Similarly, in a strong downtrend, Wm%R can stay oversold for 
weeks, indicating weakness rather than a buying opportunity. 
Overbought and oversold readings of Wm%R should be used for trading 
only after you identify the major trend. Use long -term trend -following indi - 
cators for that purpose (see Section 43). If a weekly chart shows a bull mar- 
ket, take only buy signals from daily Wm%R, and do not go short when it 
gives a sell signal. If a weekly chart indicates a bear market, sell short when - 
ever daily Wm%R gives you a sell signal, but do not go long when it 
becomes oversold. 
