30. STOCHASTIC 
Stochastic is an oscillator popularized by George Lane. It is now included in 
many software programs and widely used by computerized traders. 
Stochastic tracks the relationship of each closing price to the recent high -low 
range. 
Stochastic is more complex than Williams %R. It includes several steps 
for filtering out market noise and weeding out bad signals. Stochastic con - 
sists of two lines: a fast line called %K and a slow line called %D. 
1. The first step in calculating Stochastic is to obtain "raw Stochastic " or 
% K. 
where Ctod = today's close. 
Ln = the lowest point for the selected number of days. 
Hn = the highest point for the selected number of days. 
n = the number of days for Stochastic, selected by the trader. 
The standard width of Stochastic's time window is 5 days, although some 
traders use much higher values. A narrow window helps catch more turning 
points, but a wider window helps identify major turning points. 
2. The second step is to obtain %D. It is done by smoothing %K-usu- 
ally over a three -day period. It can be done in several ways, such as: 
30. STOCHASTIC 
3-day sum of (Ctod - L,) %D = 100 
3-day sum of (H, - L,) 
There are two ways to plot Stochastic-Fast and Slow. Fast Stochastic 
consists of two lines - %K and %D -plotted on the same chart. It is very sen- 
sitive to market turns but leads to many whipsaws. Many traders prefer a less 
sensitive Slow Stochastic. The %D of Fast Stochastic becomes the %K of 
Slow Stochastic and is smoothed by repeating step 2 to obtain %D of Slow 
Stochastic. Slow Stochastic does a better job of filtering out market noise and 
leads to fewer whipsaws. A 5-bar Slow Stochastic (smoothed over a 3 -day 
period) is a popular choice among traders (see worksheet, Figure 30 -1). 
Swiss Franc 
-- 
Figure 30-1. Stochastic Worksheet 
The %K of Fast Stochastic is similar to Williams %R. 
The %D of Fast Stochastic is obtained by smoothing %K over a 3-day 
period. 
The %D of Fast Stochastic becomes the %K of Slow Stochastic and is 
smoothed once again to obtain %D of Slow Stochastic. 
Most traders use computers to construct Stochastic. Choosing the 
width of the Stochastic window depends on a trend you are trying to 
identify. 
A very short-term Stochastic (5 days or so) helps catch short- 
term reversals. A longer Stochastic (14-21 days) helps identify more sig- 
nificant market turns. 
158 COMPUTERIZED TECHNICAL ANALYSIS 
Stochastic is designed to fluctuate between 0 and 100. Reference lines are 
drawn at 20 percent and 80 percent levels to mark overbought and oversold 
areas. Slow Stochastic seldom reaches the same extremes as raw Williams 
%R. 
Crowd Psychology 
Each price is the consensus of value of all market participants at the moment 
of transaction. Daily closing prices are important because the settlement of 
trading accounts depends on them. The high of any period marks the maxi- 
mum power of bulls during that time. The low of that period shows the max- 
imum power of bears during that time. 
Stochastic measures the capacity of bulls or bears to close the market near 
the upper or lower edge of the recent range. When prices rally, markets tend 
to close near the high. If bulls can lift prices up during the day but cannot 
close them near the top, Stochastic turns down. It shows that bulls are 
weaker than they seem and gives a sell signal. 
Daily closes tend to occur near the lows during downtrends. When a bar 
closes near its high, it shows that bears can only push prices down during the 
day but cannot hold them down. An upturn of Stochastic shows that bears 
are weaker than they appear and flashes a buy signal. 
Trading Rules 
Stochastic shows when bulls or bears become stronger or weaker. This 
information helps you decide whether bulls or bears are likely to win the 
current fight in the market. It pays to trade with the winners and against 
the losers. 
Stochastic gives three types of trading signals, listed here in the order of 
importance: divergences, the level of Stochastic lines, and their direction 
(Figure 30-2). 
Divergences 
The most powerful buy and sell signals of Stochastic are given by diver- 
gences between this indicator and prices. 
30. STOCHASTIC 
1. A bullish divergence occurs when prices fall to a new low but 
Stochastic traces a higher bottom than during the previous decline. It 
shows that bears are losing strength and prices are falling out of iner- 
tia. As soon as Stochastic turns up from its second bottom, it gives a 
strong buy signal: Go long and place a protective stop below the latest 
low in the market. The best buy signals occur when the first bottom is 
below the lower reference line and the second is above it. . 
,. Swiss Franc 
 14 
f/+\~'+/~~ 
,1,11 111 , 
'"I' 
lflll,! 
2. A bearish divergence occurs when prices rally to a new high but 
Stochastic traces a lower top than during its previous rally. It shows 
l'~'l'~!'l] 
t 11, 
l~\~~jii,hl 
1 S~II .. 65,48 1 
" 
1'1' t 
sell 
1' 
sell .. 
63*96 
:: 1 
self A 
 .A 
62,43 
.. May Slow Stochastic .. 
128,88 
Figure 30-2. Five-Day Slow Stochastic 
Stochastic lines help identify top and bottom areas when they move 
above or below their reference lines. These signals work well during 
trading ranges but are premature when a new trend begins (see early 
September). Stochastic gives its best signals when it diverges from prices. 
There is a Class A bearish divergence in early October, prior to a sharp 
price break. 
Once you go long or short using Stochastic, place a protective stop 
immediately below the latest minor low or above the latest minor high. 
There is a buy signal at the right edge of the chart-it is time to cover 
shorts and buy. 
A 6833 
" 67" 
160 COMPUTERIZED TECHNICAL ANALYSIS 
that bulls are becoming weaker and prices are rising out of inertia. As 
soon as Stochastic turns down from its second top, it gives a sell sig- 
nal: Go short and place a protective stop above the latest price peak. 
The best sell signals occur when the first top is above the upper refer- 
ence line and the second is below. 
Overbought and Oversold 
When Stochastic rallies above its upper reference line, it shows that the mar- 
ket is overbought. Overbought means too high, ready to turn down. When 
Stochastic falls below its lower reference line, it shows that the market is 
oversold. Oversold means too low, ready to turn up. 
These signals work fine during trading ranges but not when a market 
develops a trend. In uptrends, Stochastic quickly becomes overbought and 
keeps giving sell signals while the market rallies. In downtrends, Stochastic 
quickly becomes oversold and keeps giving premature buy signals. It pays to 
combine Stochastic with a long -term trend -following indicator (see Section 
43). The Triple Screen trading system allows traders to take buy signals from 
daily Stochastic only when the weekly trend is up. When the weekly trend is 
down, it allows traders to take only sell signals from daily Stochastic. 
3. When you identify an uptrend on a weekly chart, wait for daily 
Stochastic lines to decline below their lower reference line. Then, 
without waiting for their crossover or an upturn, place a buy order 
above the high of the latest price bar. Once you are long, place a pro - 
tective stop below the low of the trade day or the previous day, 
whichever is lower. 
The shape of Stochastic's bottom often indicates whether a rally is likely 
to be strong or weak. If the bottom is narrow and shallow, it shows that bears 
are weak and the rally is likely to be strong. If it is deep and wide, it shows 
that bears are strong and the rally is likely to be weak. It is better to take only 
strong buy signals. 
4. When you identify a downtrend on a weekly chart, wait for daily 
Stochastic lines to rally above their upper reference line. Then, with - 
out waiting for their crossover or a downturn, place an order to sell 
short below the low of the latest price bar. By the time Stochastic lines 
cross over, the market is often in a free fall. Once you are short, place 
30. STOCHASTIC 161 
a protective stop above the high of the trade day or the previous day, 
whichever is higher. 
The shape of Stochastic's top often indicates whether a decline is likely to 
be steep or sluggish. A narrow top in Stochastic shows that bulls are weak 
and a severe decline is likely. A Stochastic top that is high and wide shows 
that bulls are strong- it is safer to pass up that sell signal. 
5. Do not buy when Stochastic is overbought and do not sell short when 
it is oversold. This rule filters out most bad trades. 
Line Direction 
When both Stochastic lines are headed in the same direction, they confirm 
the short-term trend. When prices rise and both Stochastic lines rise, the 
uptrend is likely to continue. When prices slide and both Stochastic lines fall, 
the short-term downtrend is likely to continue. 
More on Stochastic 
Stochastic can be used in any timeframe, including weekly, daily, or intra- 
day. Weekly Stochastic usually changes its direction one week prior to 
weekly MACD -Histogram. If weekly Stochastic turns, it warns you that 
trend-following MACD -Histogram is likely to turn the next week. It is a sig - 
nal to tighten stops on existing positions or start taking profits. 
Choosing the width of the Stochastic window is important. Short -term 
oscillators are more sensitive. Long-term oscillators turn only at important 
tops and bottoms. If you use Stochastic as a stand-alone oscillator, a longer 
Stochastic is preferable. If you use Stochastic as part of a trading system, 
combined with trend -following indicators, then a shorter Stochastic is 
preferable. 
An ingenious way to use Stochastic, popularized by Jacob Bernstein, is 
called a Stochastic pop. When Stochastic crosses above its upper reference 
line, it indicates strength. You can buy for a quick rally and sell as soon as 
Stochastic turns down. This signal can help you catch the last splash of the 
bullish wave. 
Stochastic is one of the favorite tools of automatic trading systems devel- 
opers. These modern-day alchemists try to use Stochastic in a 
pu-ily 
162 COMPUTERIZED TECHNICAL ANALYSIS 
mechanical manner, buying and selling when the two Stochastic lines cross. 
They discard Stochastic when it fails to deliver magic results. Trading the 
crossovers of Stochastic lines is not profitable, no matter how much you 
optimize them, because Stochastic works differently, depending on whether 
the market is in a trend or in a trading range. 
