32. VOLUME 
Volume represents the activity of traders and investors. Each unit of volume 
in the market reflects the action of two persons: One trader sells a share and 
another buys a share, or one buys a contract and another sells a contract. 
Daily volume is the number of contracts or shares traded in one day. 
Traders usually plot volume as a histogram-vertical bars whose height 
reflects each day's volume (Figure 32-1). They usually draw it underneath 
prices. Changes in volume show how bulls and bears react to price swings. 
Changes in volume provide clues as to whether trends are likely to continue 
or to reverse. 
Some traders ignore volume. They think that prices already reflect all 
information known to the market. They say, "You get paid on price and not 
on volume." Professionals, on the other hand, know that analyzing volume 
can help them understand markets deeper and trade better. 
There are three ways to measure volume: 
1. The actual number of shares or contracts traded. For example, the 
New York Stock Exchange reports volume this way. This is the most 
objective way of measuring volume. 
2. The number of trades that took place. For example, the London Stock 
Exchange reports volume this way. This method is less objective 
because it does not distinguish between a 100 -share trade and a 5000- 
share trade. 
168 THE NEGLECTED ESSENTIALS 
.. 468,l 
.. Silver .. 446,7 
.. Volume . 77799 
0 Q .. 58349 
.. 38988 
Figure 32-1. Volume 
To interpret volume, you need t 
A. An increase in volume 
ahead. Buy or add to longs. 
B. Prices jump on more than double the average volume. It is a sign of 
a potential blow-off 
move- nn long 
positds3 
C. Prices rally near the level of their previous peak, but volume is 
much lower. This bearish divergence signals a 
toFngs and 
volume. Such climax bottoms are usu- 
stops on short positioa 
E. Silver falls to a new low, but volume is lower than it was at point 
D-a typical retest of a climax 
bottoeer shorts and3 
F. A new high in price is accompanied by an increase in volume, sim - 
ilar to what happened at point A. Continue to hold long positions. 
3. Tick volume is the number of price changes during a selected time, 
such as 10 minutes or an hour. It is called tick volume because most 
changes equal 1 tick. Most futures exchanges in the United States do 
not report intraday volume, and day -traders use tick volume as its 
proxy. 
32. VOLUME 169 
Volume reflects the activity of buyers and sellers. If you compare volume 
between two markets, it will show which one is more active or liquid. You 
are likely to suffer less slippage in liquid markets than in thin, low-volume 
markets. 
Crowd Psychology 
Volume reflects the degree of financial and emotional involvement, as well 
as pain, of market participants. A trade begins with a financial commitment 
by two persons. The decision to buy or sell may be rational, but the act of 
buying or selling creates an emotional commitment in most people. Buyers 
and sellers crave to be right. They scream at the market, pray, or use lucky 
talismans. Volume reflects the degree of emotional involvement among 
traders. 
Each tick takes money away from losers and gives it to winners. When 
prices rise, longs make money and shorts lose. When prices fall, shorts gain 
and longs lose. Winners feel happy and elated, while losers feel depressed 
and angry. Whenever prices move, about half the traders are hurting. When 
prices rise, bears are in pain, and when prices fall, bulls suffer. The greater 
the increase in volume, the more pain in the market. 
Traders react to losses like frogs to hot water. If you throw a frog into a 
boiling kettle, it will jump in response to sudden pain, but if you put a frog 
into cool water and heat it slowly, you can boil it alive. If a sudden price 
change hits traders, they jump from pain and liquidate losing positions. The 
same losers can be very patient if their losses increase gradually. 
You can lose a great deal of money in a sleepy market, such as corn, 
where a one -cent move costs only $50. If corn goes against you just a few 
cents a day, the pain is easy to tolerate. If you hang on, those pennies can add 
up to thousands of dollars in losses. Sharp moves, on the other hand, make 
losers cut their losses in a panic. Once weak hands get shaken out, the mar - 
ket is ready to reverse. Trends can last for a long time on moderate volume 
but can expire after a burst of volume. 
Who buys from a trader who sells his losing long position? It may be a 
short seller taking profits and covering shorts. It may be a bargain hunter 
who steps in because prices are "too low." That bottom -picker assumes the 
position of a loser who washed out-and he either catches the bottom or 
becomes the new loser. 
Who sells to a trader who buys to cover his losing short position? It may 
1 70 THE NEGLECTED ESSENTIALS 
be a savvy investor who takes profits on his long position. It also may be a 
top-picker who sells short because he thinks that prices are "too high." He 
assumes the position of a loser who covered his shorts, and only the future 
will tell whether he is right or wrong. 
When shorts give up during a rally, they buy to cover and push the market 
higher. Prices rise, flush out even more shorts, and the rally feeds on itself. 
When longs give up during a decline, they sell and push the market lower. 
Falling prices flush out even more longs, and the decline feeds on itself. 
Losers who give up propel trends. A trend that moves on steady volume is 
likely to continue. Steady volume shows that new losers replace those who 
wash out. Trends need a fresh supply of losers the way builders of the 
ancient pyramids needed a fresh supply of slaves. 
Falling volume shows that the supply of losers is running low and a trend 
is ready to reverse. It happens after enough losers catch on to how wrong 
they are. Old losers keep bailing out, but fewer new losers come in. Falling 
volume gives a sign that the trend is about to reverse. 
A burst of extremely high volume also gives a signal that a trend is nearing 
its end. It shows that masses of losers are bailing out. You can probably recall 
holding a losing trade longer than you should have. Once the pain becomes 
intolerable and you get out, the trend reverses and the market goes the way you 
expected, but without you! This happens time and again because most ama - 
teurs react to stress similarly and bail out at about the same time. Professionals 
do not hang in while the market beats them up. They close out losing trades 
fast and reverse or wait on the sidelines, ready to re-enter. 
Volume usually stays low in trading ranges because there is relatively lit - 
tle pain. People feel comfortable with small price changes, and trendless 
markets seem to drag on forever. A breakout is often marked by a dramatic 
increase in volume because losers run for the exits. A breakout on low vol- 
ume shows little emotional commitment to a new trend. It indicates that 
prices are likely to return into their trading range. 
Rising volume during a rally shows that more buyers and short sellers are 
pouring in. Buyers are eager to buy even if they have to pay up, and shorts 
are eager to sell to them. Rising volume shows that losers who leave are 
being replaced by a new crop of losers. 
When volume shrinks during a rally, it shows that bulls are becoming less 
eager, while bears are no longer running for cover. The intelligent bears have 
left long ago, followed by weak bears who could not take the pain. Falling 
volume shows that fuel is being removed from the uptrend and it is ready to 
reverse. 
32. VOLUME 171 
When volume dries up during a decline, it shows that bears are less eager 
to sell short, while bulls are no longer running for the exits. The intelligent 
bulls have sold long ago, and the weak bulls have been shaken out. Falling 
volume shows that the remaining bulls have a higher level of pain tolerance. 
Perhaps they have deeper pockets or bought later in the decline, or both. 
Falling volume identifies an area in which a downtrend is likely to reverse. 
This reasoning applies to long and short timeframes. As a rule of thumb, 
if today's volume is higher than yesterday's volume, then today's trend is 
likely to continue. 
Trading Rules 
The terms "high volume" and "low volume " are relative. What is low for 
IBM is high for Apple Computer, while what is low for gold is high for plat- 
inum, and so on. As a rule of thumb, "high volume" for any given market is 
at least 25 percent above average for the past two weeks, and "low volume" 
is at least 25 percent below average. 
1. High volume confirms trends. If prices rise to a new peak and volume 
reaches a new high, then prices are likely to retest or exceed that peak. 
2. If the market falls to a new low and the volume reaches a new high, 
that bottom is likely to be retested or exceeded. A "climax bottom7' is 
almost always retested on low volume, offering an excellent buying 
opportunity. 
3. If volume shrinks while a trend continues, that trend is ripe for a rever- 
sal. When a market rises to a new peak on lower volume than its pre- 
vious peak, look for a shorting opportunity. This technique does not 
work as well at market bottoms because a decline can persist on low 
volume. There is a saying on Wall Street: "It takes buying to put 
stocks up, but they can fall of their own weight." 
4. Watch volume during reactions against the trend. When an uptrend is 
punctuated by a decline, volume often picks up in a flurry of profit 
taking. When the dip continues but volume shrinks, it shows that bulls 
are no longer running or that selling pressure is spent. When volume 
dries up, it shows that the reaction is nearing an end and the uptrend is 
ready to resume. This identifies a good buying opportunity. Major 
downtrends are often punctuated by rallies which begin on heavy vol- 
THE NEGLECTED ESSENTIALS 
ume. Once weak bears have been flushed out, volume shrinks and 
gives a signal to sell short. 
More on Volume 
You can use a moving average to define the trend of volume. The slope of a 
5-day exponential moving average of volume can define volume's trend. 
You can also draw trendlines of volume and watch for their breakouts (see 
Section 21). Volume breakouts confirm price breakouts. 
Volume-based indicators provide more precise timing signals than volume 
alone. Traders' Index, Herrick Payoff Index, Force Index, and others include 
volume data (see Chapters 6 and 8). 
