33. VOLUME-BASED INDICATORS 
Traders can use several technical indicators to help them analyze volume. 
Some traders track a 5-day exponential moving average of volume. Its slope 
identifies the trend of volume (see Sections 25 and 32). Others use On- 
Balance Volume and 
Accumulation/Distribution. 
On-Balance Volume 
On-Balance Volume (OBV) is an indicator designed by Joseph Granville and 
described in his book, New Strategy of Daily Stock Market Timing. Granville 
used OBV as a leading indicator of the stock market, but other analysts have 
applied it to the futures markets. 
OBV is a running total of volume. It rises or falls each day, depending on 
whether prices close higher or lower than on the previous day. When a stock 
closes higher, it shows that bulls won the day's battle; its volume on that day 
is added to OBV. When a stock closes lower, it shows that bears won the 
day, and that day's volume is subtracted from OBV. If prices close 
unchanged, OBV stays unchanged. 
On-Balance Volume often rises or falls before prices - it acts as a leading 
indicator. As Granville put it, "Volume is the steam that makes the choo- 
choo go." 
33. VOLUME-BASED INDICATORS 173 
Crowd Psychology 
Prices represent the consensus of value, while volume represents the emo - 
tions of market participants. It reflects the intensity of traders' financial and 
emotional commitments, as well as pain among losers (see Section 32). 
OBV is a running total of volume. It tracks changes in traders' involvement 
in the market and the intensity of their pain. 
A new high in OBV shows that bulls are powerful, bears are hurting, and 
prices are likely to rise. A new low in OBV shows that bears are powerful, 
bulls are hurting, and prices are likely to fall. When the pattern of OBV devi- 
ates from the pattern of prices, it shows that mass emotions are not in gear 
with mass consensus. A crowd is more likely to follow its heart than its 
mind. This is why changes in volume often precede changes in prices. 
Trading Signals 
The patterns of OBV tops and bottoms are more important than the absolute 
levels of this indicator. Those levels depend on when you start to calculate 
On-Balance Volume. When OBV rises or falls together with prices, the trend 
is confirmed. If prices reach a new high and OBV reaches a new high, the 
uptrend is likely to continue. If prices reach a new low and OBV falls to a 
new low, the downtrend is likely to continue. It is safer to trade in the direc- 
tion of a trend that is confirmed by OBV (Figure 33 -1). 
1. When OBV reaches a new high, it confirms the power of bulls, indi - 
cates that prices are likely to rise even higher, and gives a buy signal. 
When OBV reaches a new low, it confirms the power of bears, calls 
for lower prices ahead, and gives a signal to sell short. 
2. OBV gives its strongest buy and sell signals when it diverges from ---- 
 -\_ 
 __ 
 - pr- If prices rally, sell off, and then rise to a new 
TiTgli,%ut OBV I 
- - 
 - 
rallies to a lower high, it creates a bearish divergence and gives a 
strong sell signal. If prices decline, rebound, and then fall to a new 
low, but OBV falls to a more shallow bottom, it traces a bullish diver - 
gence and gives a strong buy signal. Long -term divergences are more 
important than short -term divergences. Divergences that develop over 
the course of several weeks give stronger signals than those that last 
only a few days. 
174 THE NEGLECTED ESSENTIALS 
73 
65 
56 
48 
48 
658581 
534736 
419964 
281193 
163421 
Figure 33-1. On-Balance Volume 
When OBV moves in gear with a trading vehicle, it confirms its trend. 
The uptrend A of OBV confirms the stock rally. Its break in March gives 
a sell signal. There are two shorting signals at the top. The first, in early 
April, is given by a bearish divergence between OBV and price. Two 
weeks later, OBV breaks its support B, giving another signal to sell short. 
The downtrendline C of OBV confirms the slide of Apple 
Computer-hold shorts. An upside breakout in July gives a signal to cover 
shorts. 
3. When prices are in a trading range and OBV breaks out to a new high, 
it gives a buy signal. When prices are in a trading range and OBV 
breaks down and falls to a new low, it gives a signal to sell short. 
More on OBV 
One of the reasons for Granville's success in his heyday (see Section 6) was 
that he combined OBV with two other indicators - the Net Field Trend 
indicator and the Climax indicator. Granville calculated OBV for each 
stock in the Dow Jones Industrial Average and rated its OBV pattern as ris- 
ing, falling, or neutral. He called that a Net Field Trend of a stock: It could 
33. VOLUME-BASED INDICATORS 175 
be 
+I, -1, or 0. Climax indicator was a sum of the Net Field Trends of all 30 
Dow stocks. 
When the stock market rallied and the Climax indicator reached a new 
high, it confirmed strength and gave a buy signal. If the stock market rallied 
but the Climax indicator made a lower top, it gave a sell signal. 
You can view the Dow Jones Industrial Average as a team of 30 horses 
pulling the market wagon. The Climax indicator shows how many horses are 
pulling uphill, downhill, or standing still. If 24 out of 30 horses pull up, 1 
down and 5 are resting, then the market wagon is likely to move up. If 9 
horses pull up, 7 pull down, and 14 are resting, then the wagon is ready to 
roll downhill. 
OBV, the Net Field Trend indicator, and the Climax indicator can be eas- 
ily programmed on a computer. It would be worthwhile to apply them to a 
database which includes all stocks of the S&P 500 index. That may produce 
good signals for trading S&P 500 futures or options. 
This indicator was developed by Larry Williams and described in his 1972 
book, How I Made a Million Dollars. It was designed as a leading indicator 
for stocks, but several analysts have applied it to futures. The unique feature 
of 
Accumulation/Distribution (AD) is that it tracks the relationship between 
opening and closing prices, along with volume. 
If prices close higher than they opened, then bulls won the day and AD is .-- - - gosit~ve. If prices close lower than they opened, then the bears won and 
AD 
is negative. If pricks close where they opened, then nobody won and A/D is 
zero. A' running total of each day's AID creates a cumulative 
Accumulation/Distribution indicator. 
A/D credits bulls or bears with only a fraction of each day's volume. That 
fraction depends on the day's range and the distance from opening to closing 
price. 
Thegreater the spread be&een opening and closing 
*relative-f_o. 
- -- 
daily rakge, the greater 
 thzhange in 
~ccumulation/~~ution. 
Close - Open 
A/D= Volume High - Low 
For example, if the distance from today's high to low is 5 points but the dis - 
tance from the open to the close is 2 points, then only 2/5 of today's volume 
176 THE NEGLECTED ESSENTIALS 
is credited to the winning camp. The pattern of A/D highs and lows is  more^ 
important than its absolute level, which depends on the starting date. 
When the market rises, most people focus 
.on new highs. But if prices 
open higher and close lower, then A/D, which tracks their relationship, turns 
down. It warns that the uptrend is weaker than it appears. If A/D ticks up 
while prices are down, it shows that bulls are gaining strength. 
Crowd Behavior 
Opening and closing prices are among the most important prices of the day. 
The opening price reflects all the pressures that have gathered while the mar- 
ket was closed. Openings are often dominated by amateurs who read their 
newspapers in the evening and trade in the morning. 
Professional traders are active throughout the day. They often trade 
against the amateurs. As the day goes on, waves of buying and selling by 
amateurs and slow-moving institutions gradually subside. Professionals usu - 
ally dominate the markets at closing time. Closing prices are especially 
important because the settlement of trading accounts depends on them. 
AD tracks the outcomes of daily battles between amateurs and profes- 
sionals. It ticks up when prices close higher than they opened - when profes - 
sionals are more bullish than amateurs. It ticks down when prices close 
lower than they opened- when professionals are more bearish than ama- 
teurs. It pays to bet with the professionals and against the amateurs. 
Trading Rules 
When the market opens low and closes high, it moves from weakness to 
strength. AID then rises and shows that market professionals are more 
bullish than amateurs. This means that the market is likely to move higher 
the following day. When A/D falls, it shows that market professionals are 
more bearish than amateurs. When the market moves from strength to weak - 
ness, it is likely to reach a lower low the following day. 
The best trading signals are given by divergences between 
 AD and 
prices. 
1. If prices rally to a new high but AID reaches a lower peak, it gives a 
signal to sell short. This bearish divergence shows that market profes - 
sionals are selling into the rally (Figure 33-2). 
33. VOLUME-BASED INDICATORS 177 
62,250 
Apple Computer .. 52,750 
lb,J 
fill 
t,f~lb,,t~lh' 
11*1 .. 43,258 
" 
b~ll~bv,t~ 
 lb~t~,,,, 
 tblt 
futll,if~~llfltfl .. 33,750 
't'l~l~ll~~l,l~~,,t 
 ~~~~III~~I) . 24,250 
Accurnulation/Distribution 18462 
10355 
18248 
10140 
10033 
Figure 33-2. 
Accurnulation/Distribution 
Accurnulation/Distribution gives it 
56ng&Q&c diverges 
tf&-.~~sh 
 divergeGes abuy at the 
~ctob%o<l tc tom. ~ouFmonths later and $30 higher, a bearish divergence gives a sell 
signal. Take profits on long positions and go short. 
2. A bullish divergence occurs when prices fall to a new low but 
 AD 
stops at a higher low than during its previous decline. It shows that 
market professionals are using the decline for buying, and a rally is 
coming. 
More on 
Accumulation/Distribution 
When you go long or short, following a divergence between A/D and price, 
remember that even market professionals can go wrong. Use stops and pro- 
tect yourself by following the Hound of the Baskemilles rule (see Section 
23). 
Volume Accumulator, designed by Marc Chaikin, is an indicator very 
similar to 
AD. Volume Accumulator uses a mean price for the day instead of 
the opening price. It is especially useful for those analysts who do not have 
178 THE NEGLECTED ESSENTIALS 
access to opening prices. Its trading signals and rules are similar to 
Accumulation/Distribution. 
There are important parallels between 
 ADand Japanese Candlestick 
charts. Both focus on the differences between opening and closing prices. 
AD goes further than candlesticks by taking volume into account. 
