34. OPEN INTEREST 
Open interest is the number of contracts held by buyers or owed by short 
sellers in a given market on a given day. It shows the number of existing 
contracts. Open interest equals either a total long or a total short position. 
Stock market shares are traded for as long as a company stays in business 
as a separate unit. Futures and options traders, on the other hand, deal in con- 
tracts for a future delivery that expire at a set time. 
A futures or options buyer who wants to accept delivery and a seller who 
wants to deliver have to wait until the first notice day. This waiting period 
ensures that the numbers of contracts that are long and short are always equal. 
In any case, very few futures and options traders plan to deliver or to accept 
delivery. Most traders close out their positions before the first notice day. 
Open interest rises or falls depending on whether new traders enter the 
market or old traders exit it. Open interest rises only when a new buyer and a 
new seller enter the market. Their trade creates a new contract. For example, 
if open interest in April COMEX gold is 8500 contracts, then 8500 contracts 
are held by bulls and 8500 contracts are owed by short sellers at the close of 
that day. If open interest rises to 8600, it means that the net of 100 new con- 
tracts have been bought and sold short. 
Open interest falls when a trader who is long trades with someone who is 
short. When both of them close out their positions, open interest falls by one 
contract because one contract disappears. If a new bull buys from an old bull 
who is getting out of his long position, open interest remains unchanged: 
Open interest also does not change when a new bear sells to an old bear who 
needs to buy because he is closing out his short position. 
Buyer Seller Open Interest 
New buyer New seller Increases 
New buyer Former buyer sells Unchanged 
Former seller buys to cover New seller Unchanged 
Former seller buys to cover Former buyer sells Decreases 
34. OPEN INTEREST 179 
Most futures and options exchanges release open interest data one day 
later than prices. Some exchanges provide phone numbers to call for prelimi - 
nary figures on open interest. 
Technicians usually plot open interest as a line below price bars (Figure 
34-1). Some chart services also plot average open interest for the past several 
years. Open interest gives important messages when it deviates from its sea - 
sonal norm. Open interest varies from season to season in many markets 
because of massive hedging by commercial interests at different stages in 
production cycles. 
Open interest in currency futures tends to drop four times a year, at the 
time of a contract rollover. If open interest does not drop during a rollover, it 
shows a strong commitment among traders to the existing trend, which is 
likely to accelerate. 
Crowd Psychology 
It takes one bull and one bear to create a futures or options contract. A bull 
buys a contract if he is convinced that prices are going higher. A bear sells 
short a contract if he is convinced that prices are going lower. When the two 
trade, open interest rises by one contract. A single trade between one bull 
and one bear is unlikely to move the markets. But when thousands of traders 
make their trades, they propel or reverse market trends. 
Open interest reflects the intensity of conflict between bulls and bears. It 
reflects the willingness of longs to maintain long positions and the willing - 
ness of shorts to maintain short positions. When bulls and bears do not 
expect the market to move in their favor, they close out their positions and 
open interest shrinks. 
There are two people on opposite sides of every trade. One of them gets 
hurt when prices change. If prices rally, bears get hurt. If prices fall, bulls get 
hurt. As long as the losers hope, they hang on, and open interest does not 
change. 
A rise in open interest shows that a crowd of confident bulls is facing 
down a crowd of equally confident bears. It points to a growing disagree - 
ment between the two camps. One group is sure to lose, but as long as poten- 
tial losers keep pouring in, the trend will continue. These ideas have been 
clearly put forth in L. Dee Belveal's classic book, Charting Commodity 
Market Price Behavior. 
Bulls and bears keep adding to their positions as long as they strongly dis- 
180 THE NEGLECTED ESSENTIALS 
agree about the future course of prices. It takes conviction and disagreement 
to maintain a trend. Rising open interest shows that the supply of losers is 
growing and the current trend is likely to persist. If open interest increases 
during an uptrend, it shows that longs are buying while bears are shorting . 13 
12 
. 11 
. 10 
9 Cocoa 
 PI#\ 
r]~it'Y 
I/~,II,P/ 
 I,l, 
P"'tl,t ,,,,,I I 
G+'hfl~llflM,lb+p'.$d,+ p' . 
1,) 
Open Interest 58347 
55072 
51797 
71 Hau Jun Jul Iluu Seu 
at Ndu 
rn 45247 
Figure 34-1. Open Interest 
Open interest (01) reflects the number of all short or long positions in 
any futures or options market. Open interest depends on the intensity of 
conflict between bulls and bears. 
Rising 01 shows that the conflict between bulls and bears is becoming 
more intense and confirms the existing trend. Rising 01 during uptrends 
shows it is safe to add to long positions (A and D). Flat 01 shows that 
fewer losers are entering the market. This means that a mature trend is 
nearing its end and it is time to take profits or tighten stops (B and 
El. 
Falling 01 shows that losers are leaving the market and winners are cash- 
ing in-that a trend is nearing its end. A fire cannot continue when fuel is 
withdrawn, and a sharp drop in 01 during a trend signals that a reversal 
is near (C and F). 
At the right edge of the chart, cocoa prices have stabilized after falling 
in October and open interest is flat. It shows that the decline in cocoa 
has shaken out weak bulls and the uptrend is ready to resume. It is time 
to go long, with a protective stop below the recent lows. 
l"l,h,+,/~t'*~ E 
34. OPEN INTEREST 181 
because they believe that the market is too high. They are likely to run for 
cover when the uptrend puts a squeeze on them - and their buying will pro- 
pel prices higher. 
If open interest rises during a downtrend, it shows that shorts are aggres - 
sively selling while bottom -pickers are buying. Those bargain hunters are 
likely to bail out when falling prices hurt them, and their selling will push 
prices even lower. An increase in open interest gives a green light to the 
existing trend. 
When a bull is convinced that prices are going higher and decides to buy, 
but a bear is afraid to sell short, that bull can buy only from another bull who 
bought earlier and now wants to get out. Their trade creates no new contract, 
and open interest stays unchanged. When open interest stays flat during a 
rally, it shows that the supply of losers has stopped growing. 
When a bear is convinced that prices are going lower, he wants to sell 
short. If a bull is afraid to buy from him, that bear can only sell to another 
bear who shorted earlier and now wants to cover and leave. Their trade cre - 
ates no new contract, and open interest does not change. When open interest 
stays flat during a decline, it shows that the supply of bottom-pickers is not 
growing. Whenever open interest flattens out, it flashes a yellow light- a 
warning that the trend is aging and the best gains are probably behind. 
Falling open interest shows that losers are bailing out while winners are 
taking profits. When their disagreement decreases, the trend is ripe for a 
reversal. Open interest falls when losers abandon hope and get out of the 
market without being replaced by new losers. When a bull decides to get out 
of his long position and a bear decides to cover his short position, the two 
may trade with one another. When they do, a contract disappears, and open 
interest shrinks by one contract. Falling open interest shows that winners are 
cashing in and losers are giving up hope. It flashes a red light - it signals the 
end of a trend. 
Trading Rules 
A 10 percent change in open interest deserves serious attention, while a 25 
percent change often gives major trading messages. The meaning of rising, 
falling, or flat open interest depends on whether prices are rallying, falling, 
or flat at the time of change in open interest. 
1. When open interest rises during a rally, it confirms the uptrend and 
gives a signal that it is safe to add to long positions. It shows that more 
THE NEGLECTED ESSENTIALS 
short sellers are coming into the market. When they bail out, their 
short covering is likely to push the rally higher. 
2. When open interest rises while prices fall, it shows that bottom -pick- 
ers are active in the market. It is safe to sell short because these bar- 
gain hunters are likely to push prices lower when they throw in the 
towel. 
3. When open interest rises while prices are in a trading range, it is a 
bearish sign. Commercial hedgers are more likely to sell short than 
speculators. A sharp increase in open interest while prices are flat 
shows that savvy hedgers are probably shorting the market. 
4. When open interest falls sharply while prices are in a trading range, it 
identifies short covering by major commercial interests and gives a 
buy signal. When commercials start covering shorts, they show that 
they expect the market to rise. 
5. When open interest falls during a rally, it shows that both winners and 
losers are getting "cold feet." Longs are taking their profits, and shorts 
are covering. Markets discount the future, and a trend that is accepted 
by the majority is ready to reverse. If open interest falls during a rally, 
sell and get ready to sell short. 
6. When open interest falls during a decline, it shows that shorts are cov - 
ering and buyers are taking their losses and bailing out. If open interest 
falls during a slide, cover shorts and get ready to buy. 
7. When open interest goes flat during a rally, it warns that the uptrend is 
getting old and the best gains have already been made. This gives you 
a signal to tighten stops on long positions and avoid new buying. 
When open interest goes flat during a decline, it warns you that the 
downtrend is mature and it is best to tighten stops on short positions. 
Flat open interest in a trading range does not contribute any new infor - 
mation. 
More on Open Interest 
The higher the open interest, the more active the market, and the less slip- 
page you risk while getting in and out of positions. Short -term traders should 
focus on the markets with the highest open interest. In the futures markets, it 
pays to trade the delivery months with the highest open interest. 
35. HERRICK PAYOFF INDEX 183 
Tracking Commitments of Traders reports can help you find out 
whether new buying or selling is primarily done by small or large specula - 
tors or by hedgers (see Chapter 7). 
Very few technical indicators use open interest. The Herrick Payoff 
Index is the best-known indicator that utilizes it. 
