35. HERRICK PAYOFF INDEX 
The Herrick Payoff Index (HPI) is an indicator developed by John Herrick, a 
technical market analyst from California. He taught it privately, but the indi - 
cator became more popular after it was included in CompuTrac software in 
the early 1980s. 
The Herrick Payoff Index helps detect accumulation and distribution. 
Most indicators measure only prices, some measure volume, but HPI tracks 
open interest as well as prices and volume. HPI confirms valid trends and 
helps catch their reversals. 
How to Construct HPI 
The Herrick Payoff Index may be calculated using several types of daily 
data. You may use a single contract with its own price, volume, and open 
interest. It is more practical to combine volume and open interest from all 
contracts and apply them to the prices of the most active delivery month. 
HPI uses daily high and low prices, volume, and open interest. It requires 
data for at least three weeks before it begins producing meaningful numbers. 
Its complex formula makes using a computer almost a necessity (see work - 
sheet, Figure 35 -1). 
HPI = Ky + (K - Ky) 
where Ky = yesterday's HPI. 
K = [(M -My) C V] 
[I 
* {(I 2)/G)] 
and M = mean price - i.e., (High t Low)/2. 
My = yesterday's mean price. 
C = the value of a 1-cent move (or use the same constant for 
all contracts). 
V = volume. 
184 THE NEGLECTED ESSENTIALS 
Copper 
Figure 35-1. Herrick Payoff Index Worksheet 
HPI measures changes in prices, volume, and open interest. It is based on 
mean rather than closing prices-the average consensus of value for the 
day. The complexity of HPI makes using a computer almost a necessity. 
I = absolute value of today's minus yesterday's open interest. 
G = today's or yesterday's open interest, whichever is less. 
The "+" or "-" sign in the right brackets is determined as follows: 
If M 
> My, the sign is "+"; if M 
< My, the sign is "-". 
Traders can apply HPI only to daily data and not to weekly or intraday 
data. There is no such thing as weekly open interest. Weekly volume can be 
obtained by adding up daily volume for five days, but open interest cannot 
be added up. 
Crowd Psychology 
The Herrick Payoff Index measures mean prices rather than closing prices. 
Daily mean prices represent the average consensus of value for the day. 
Volume represents the degree of financial commitment in a given market. 
When volume increases, the absolute value of HPI for that day increases. 
35. HERRICK PAYOFF INDEX 
Daily changes in open interest represent the flow of funds into and out of 
the market. Rising open interest is bullish in an uptrend and bearish in a 
downtrend. Falling open interest is bearish in an uptrend and bullish in a 
downtrend. Flat open interest is essentially neutral. 
Trading Rules 
The Herrick Payoff Index gives several types of trading signals, listed here 
in the order of importance. Divergences between HPI and prices identify 
some of the best trading opportunities (Figure 35-2). When HPI breaks its 
trendline, it gives an early warning that a price trendline is likely to be bro- 
ken. When HPI crosses its centerline, it confirms new price trends. 
1. When prices fall to a new low but HPI makes a higher bottom than 
during the previous decline, it creates a bullish divergence and gives a 
buy signal. When HPI turns up from its second bottom, buy and place 
a protective stop below the latest price low. 
2. A bearish divergence occurs when prices rally to a new high but HPI 
makes a lower top. The signal to sell short is flashed when HPI turns 
down from its second top. Place a protective stop above the latest high 
price. 
Important divergences develop over the course of several weeks. A diver- 
gence that takes two months to develop is more powerful than the one in 
which two weeks passed between the tops or bottoms. Pay attention to the 
differences in the height of the adjacent HPI tops or bottoms. If the first top 
or bottom is far away from the centerline and the second top or bottom is 
near that line, that divergence is likely to lead to a greater move. 
Bullish and bearish divergences of HPI often have long lead times. Once 
you have identified a potential turning point using an HPI divergence, lean 
on short-term oscillators for more precise timing. If a divergence between 
HPI and price aborts, and you get stopped out, watch closely -you may get 
an even better trading opportunity if a regular divergence turns into a triple 
bullish or triple bearish divergence. Triple bullish divergences consist of 
three lower bottoms in prices and three higher bottoms in HPI. Triple bearish 
divergences consist of three higher tops in prices and three lower tops in 
HPI. They occur at some of the major turning points in the markets. 
3. HPI lends itself well to classical charting methods, especially trend- 
lines. When trendlines of prices and HPI point in the same direction, 
186 THE NEGLECTED ESSENTIALS 
128 
122 
115 
189 
183 
89,2 
51,7 
14,l 
Herrick Payoff Index -23,4 
-61,i 
Figure 35-2. Herrick Payoff lndex 
HPI tracks the flow of funds into or out of the market by measuring 
changes in prices, volume, and open interest. HPI gives its best signals 
when its patterns diverge from price patterns. HPI identified market tops 
in August and September by tracing lower peaks while prices rose to 
new highs. HPI called market bottoms in October and November when 
it stopped declining and bottomed out at more shallow levels while cop - 
per slid to new lows. 
The bullish divergence in November was followed by a breaking of a 
downtrendline of HPI and a rally above HPl's centerline. This combina- 
tion gave an especially strong signal to buy copper. The best signals 
develop slowly and give traders plenty of time to get aboard a new 
trend. 
they confirm trends. HPI often breaks its trendline before prices break 
theirs. When HPI breaks below its uptrend, it gives a sell signal. When 
it breaks above a downtrend, it gives a buy signal. Then it pays to 
either take profits or to tighten stops. 
4. The position of HPI above or below its centerline shows whether bulls 
or bears dominate the market. When HPI is above its centerline, it 
shows that bulls are in control-it is better to be long. When HPI is 
below its centerline, it is better to be short. Bulls may buy or add to 
36. TIME 187 
their long positions when HPI rises above its centerline. When HPI 
declines below its centerline, it confirms downtrends. 
