36. TIME 
Most people conduct their lives as if they intend to live forever-with no 
review of the past, no real planning for the future, and minimal learning from 
past mistakes. Freud showed that the unconscious mind does not have a 
notion of time. Our deep-seated wishes remain largely unchanged through - 
out life. 
When people join crowds, their behavior becomes even more primitive 
and impulsive than when they are alone. Crowds pay no attention to time 
even though they are affected by its passage. Individuals are ruled by the cal- 
endar and the clock, but crowds have no notion of time. Crowds act out their 
emotions as if they had all the time in the world. 
Most traders focus only on changes in prices and pay little attention to 
time. This is just another sign of being caught up in mass mentality. 
The awareness of time is a sign of civilization. A thinking person is aware 
of time, while someone who is acting impulsively is not. A market analyst 
who pays attention to time is aware of a dimension hidden from the market 
crowd. 
Cycles 
Long-tenn price cycles are a fact of economic life. For example, the U.S. 
stock market tends to run in four-year cycles. They exist because the ruling 
party inflates the economy going into the presidential election once every 
four years. The party that wins the election deflates the economy when vot - 
ers cannot take revenge at the polls. Flooding the economy with liquidity 
lifts the stock market, and draining liquidity pushes it down. This is why the 
2 years before a presidential election tend to be bullish, and the first 12 to 18 
months following an election tend to be bearish. 
Major cycles in agricultural commodities are due to fundamental produc - 
tion factors, coupled with the mass psychology of producers. For example, 
when livestock prices rise, farmers breed more animals. When those animals 
reach the market, prices fall and producers cut back. When the supply is 
absorbed, scarcity pushes prices up, breeders go to work again, and the 
188 THE NEGLECTED ESSENTIALS 
bullbear cycle repeats. This cycle is shorter in hogs than in cattle because 
pigs breed faster than cows. 
Long-term cycles can help traders identify market tides. Instead, most 
traders get themselves in trouble by trying to use short -term cycles for preci- 
sion timing and predicting minor turning points. 
Price peaks and valleys on the charts often seem to follow in an orderly 
manner. Traders reach for a pencil and a ruler, measure distances between 
neighboring peaks, and project them into the future to forecast the next top. 
Then they measure distances between recent bottoms and extend them into 
the future to forecast the next low. 
Cycles put bread and butter on the tables of several experts who sell ser- 
vices forecasting highs and lows. Few of them realize that what appears like 
a cycle on the charts is often a figment of the imagination. If you analyze 
price data using a mathematically rigorous program such as John Ehlers' 
MESA (Maximum Entropy Spectral Analysis), you will see that approxi - 
mately 80 percent of what appears like cycles is simply market noise. A 
human mind needs to find order in chaos- and an illusion of order is better 
than no order for most people. 
If you look at any river from the air, it appears to have cycles, swinging 
right and left. Every river meanders in its valley because water flows faster in 
its middle than near the shores, creating turbulences that force the river to turn. 
Looking for market cycles with a ruler and a pencil is like searching for 
water with a divining rod. Profits from an occasional success are erased by 
many losses due to unsound methods. If you are serious about trading with 
cycles, you need a mathematical method for finding them, such as MESA or 
Fourier analysis. 
Fourier analysis searches for cycles in very large data samples, but MESA 
takes a different tack. It searches for evidence of orderly cyclical movement 
in a relatively short data window (Figure 36-1). Unlike other packages, 
which give nonstop trading signals, MESA tells traders that no valid cycles 
are present about 80 percent of the time. It aims to recognize cycles as they 
emerge from market noise and tells you when a cycle begins to fade. 
Indicator Seasons 
A farmer sows in spring, harvests in late summer, and uses the fall to get 
ready for winter. There is a time to sow and a time to reap, a time to bet on a 
warm trend and a time to get ready for a cold spell. The concept of seasons 
36. TIME 189 
can be applied to the financial markets. A trader can use a farmer's 
approach. He should look to buy in spring, sell in summer, go short in the 
fall, and cover in winter. 
Martin Pring developed the model of seasons for prices, but this concept 
works even better with technical indicators. Indicator seasons show you 
where you are in the market cycle. This simple but effective concept helps 
you buy when prices are low and sell short when they are high. It tells you 275 
I! 
SPECTRLrn Corn ji 
...... ,: 
ii 10 28 30 43 58, I 
22-1 
$I CYCLE LENGTH Transition to a 
i 
 l!l: cyclical market 
219 j 
 ? i 
211 ' 
DATE 
= 911181 
..._ 
OpsN 
:: 
255 
13v.'-,b*--'.C!, ............ 
 .,.:... .T' .,: . .. 
i 
* 
50 .................... 
 ./ 40 
HIM :: 
z8.53 ... >. . 
., . . /. . ?>. .., ... 
: ........ -. .i 38 
LOU :: 
255.8@ ...... j. .... 
j';; j'\ 
.,....,.- ....................... '-- . ./ 20 
CLOSE:: 
?tJ 
,SR ..... .\....-I\. 
 ? ............................. .j 
10 
1 R 
Figure 36-1. Price Cycles-Maximum Entropy Spectral Analysis 
(MESA) 
MESA (a method and a software package) shows that cycles are prone to 
shift and disappear. The narrow window at the bottom of the chart keeps 
track of cyclic content. When it is near its upper edge it shows that the 
market is chaotic, and when it nears its lower edge it shows that the mar - 
ket is cycling. A vertical arrow marks a transition from a chaotic to a 
cyclical market. 
The square window in the upper left corner shows cyclic content for 
any date selected by the analyst. It currently shows that a 13-day cycle is 
rising above the market noise. The jagged line at the right edge of the 
chart projects the current cycle several days into the future. 
190 THE NEGLECTED ESSENTIALS 
when an indicator signal is likely to be strong or weak. It helps you stand 
apart from the market crowd. 
The season of any indicator is defined by two factors: its slope and its 
position above or below the centerline. For example, we can apply the con - 
cept of indicator seasons to MACD -Histogram (see Section 26). We define 
the slope of MACD-Histogram as the relationship between two neighboring 
bars. When MACD -Histogram rises from below its centerline, it is spring; 
when it rises above its centerline, it is summer; when it falls from above its 
centerline, it is autumn; and when it falls below its centerline, it is winter. 
Spring is the best season for going long, and autumn is the best season for 
selling short (Figure 36-2). 
Indicator Slope Position Relative to Centerline Season Action 
Rising Below Spring Go long 
Rising Above Summer Start selling 
Falling Above Fall Go short 
Falling Below Winter Start covering 
When MACD -Histogram is below its centerline but its slope is rising, it is 
spring in the market. The weather is cool but turning warmer. Most traders 
expect the winter to return and are afraid to buy. Emotionally, it is hard to 
buy because the memories of a downtrend are still fresh. In fact, spring is the 
best time for buying, with the highest profit potential. Risk is low because a 
protective stop can be placed slightly below the market. 
When MACD rises above its centerline, it is summer in the market - and 
most traders recognize the uptrend. It is emotionally easy to buy in summer 
because bulls have plenty of company. In fact, profit potential in summer is 
lower than in spring and risks are higher because stops have to be farther 
away from the market. 
When MACD -Histogram is above its centerline but its slope turns down, 
it is autumn in the market. Few traders recognize the change and they keep 
buying, expecting summer to return. Emotionally, it is hard to sell short in 
autumn - it requires you to stand apart from the crowd, which is still bullish. 
In fact, autumn is the best time for selling short. The profit potential is high, 
while risks can be limited by placing a stop above the recent highs or using 
options. 
When MACD -Histogram falls below its centerline, it is winter in the mar- 
ket. By then, most traders recognize the downtrend. It is emotionally easy to 
sell short in winter, joining many vocal bears. In fact, the riskheward ratio is 
rapidly shifting against bears. Potential rewards are getting smaller and risks 
are high because stops have to be placed relatively far away from prices. 
36. TIME 191 
.. 26182 
Figure 36-2. Indicator Seasons 
The concept of seasons can be applied to almost any indicator, even 
though this example focuses on the weekly MACD-Histogram. It helps 
you trade in gear with the markets. 
Autumn-the indicator is above its centerline but falling. This is the 
best season for establishing short positions. 
Winter-the indicator drops below its centerline. Use weakness to take 
profits on short positions. 
Spring-the indicator turns up from below its centerline. It is the best 
time to establish long positions. Notice "a cold spell " in spring 
when prices fell to a new low and MACD-Histogram ticked down 
temporarily. Do not sell short when MACD-Histogram turns down 
from below its centerline. Do not buy when it turns up from above 
its centerline. A bullish divergence when prices fall to a new low 
while the indicator makes a more shallow bottom gives a powerful 
buy signal. 
Summer-the indicator rises above its centerline. When the weather 
gets hot, use strength to take profits on long positions. 
Just as a farmer pays attention to the vagaries of weather, a trader needs to 
pay attention to the vagaries of the markets. An autumn on the farm can be 
interrupted by an Indian summer, and a market can stage a strong rally in 
192 THE NEGLECTED ESSENTIALS 
autumn. A sudden freeze can hit the fields in spring, and the market can drop 
early in a bull move. A trader needs to use his judgment and apply several 
indicators and techniques to avoid getting whipsawed (see Section 43). 
The concept of indicator seasons focuses a trader's attention on the pas - 
sage of time in the market. It helps you plan for the season ahead instead of 
jumping in response to other people's actions. 
Retracements 
Many traders watch price retracements. For example, if a market rallies 120 
points, traders try to add to long positions when the market retraces 50 per- 
cent of the preceding move and declines 60 points from the top. 
Many floor traders look for a trend to reverse after it retraces 61.8 percent 
of the previous move. This number is based on the Fibonacci number series. 
This idea of measuring retracements can also be applied to time. It pays to 
measure how long each rally and decline have lasted. For example, rallies in 
a bull market are often interrupted by declines that last approximately half as 
long as the preceding rallies. If you discover that rallies tend to last 8 days 
and declines 5 days, that knowledge encourages you to look for a buying 
opportunity 4 days into a decline. 
The Factor of Five 
Analysts often feel confused when they look at charts in different timeframes 
and see that the market is going in several directions at once. The trend may 
be up on the daily charts but down on the weeklies, and vice versa. Which of 
these trends will you follow? This becomes even more complex if you look 
at intraday charts. Most traders pick one timeframe and close their eyes to 
others - until a sudden move outside of "their" timeframe hits them. 
The factor of 5 links all timeframes. If you start with monthly charts and 
proceed to the weeklies, you will notice that there are 4.5 weeks to a month. 
As you switch to daily charts, you will see 5 trading days to a week. As your 
timeframe narrows, you will look at hourly charts- and there are approxi - 
mately 5-6 hours to a trading day. Day -traders can proceed even further and 
look at 10 -minute charts, followed by 2-minute charts. All are related by the 
factor of 5. 
36. TIME 193 
The proper way to analyze any market is to analyze it in at least two time- 
frames. They should be related by the factor of 5. When you analyze the 
market in two timeframes, the shorter of them has to be five times shorter 
than the longer one. If you want to analyze daily charts, you must first exam - 
ine weekly charts, and if you want to day-trade using 10 -minute charts, you 
first need to analyze hourly charts. This is one of the key principles of the 
Triple Screen trading system (see Section 43). 
Stock Market Indicators 
