37. NEW HIGH-NEW LOW INDEX 
Stock and futures traders used to live like two separate tribes. They traded 
different markets and used different analytic tools. The wall between them 
began to crumble after stock index futures were created in 1982. Both tribes 
rushed to trade them. An astute trader owes it to himself to master the tools 
of both tribes. 
Shrewd stock traders use Stochastic, moving averages, and other tools of 
futures analysts. Futures and options traders can time their stock index trades 
better by using stock market indicators. They include the New High-New 
Low Index (probably the best leading indicator of the stock market), the 
Traders' Index (TRIN), and several others. 
How to Construct NH-NL 
The New High-New Low Index (NH -NL) tracks the numbers of market 
leaders. It measures the number of stocks that have reached new highs or 
lows for the year on any given day. The stocks on the list of new highs are 
the leaders in strength, and the stocks on the list of new lows are the leaders 
in weakness. NH-NL confirms trends when it rallies or falls in gear with 
prices. It identifies tops and bottoms in the stock market when it diverges 
from prices. 
The New High-New Low Index measures daily differences between new 
37. NEW HIGH-NEW LOW INDEX 195 
highs and new lows. The New High-New Low Index is easy to calculate by 
hand, using information from the Market Diary section of most major news - 
papers. 
NH-NL = New Highs - New Lows 
New highs and new lows are reported by most data services in the United 
States. Make sure that your data vendor calculates new highs and lows over 
a 52-week period. Some use the ancient "calendar method " and calculate 
new highs and lows going back only to January. 
Plot the New High-New Low Index as a histogram, with a horizontal ref- 
erence line at zero level. On the days when there are more new highs than 
new lows, NH-NL is positive and plotted above the centerline. On the days 
when there are more new lows than new highs, NH-NL is negative and plot - 
ted below the centerline. If the numbers of new highs and new lows are 
equal, NH-NL is zero. 
Crowd Psychology 
A stock appears on the list of new highs when it is the strongest it has been 
in a year. This shows that a herd of eager bulls is chasing its shares. A stock 
appears on the list of new lows when it is the weakest it has been in a year. 
This shows that a crowd of aggressive bears is dumping its shares. 
The New High-New Low Index tracks the strongest and the weakest 
stocks on the exchange and compares their numbers. It measures the balance 
of power between the leaders in strength and the leaders in weakness. This is 
why NH-NL is a leading indicator of the stock market. The broad indexes, 
such as the S&P 500, tend to follow the trend of NH -NL (Figure 37-1). 
You can visualize the 2000 stocks on the New York Stock Exchange as a 
regiment of 2000 men. If each stock is a soldier, then new highs and new 
lows are the officers. New highs are the officers who lead the attack up a hill, 
and new lows are the officers who are deserting and running downhill. There 
are no bad soldiers, only bad officers, say the military experts. The New 
High-New Low Index shows whether more officers lead the attack uphill or 
run downhill. 
When NH -NL rises above its centerline, it shows that bullish leadership is 
stronger. When NH -NL falls below its centerline, it shows that bearish leader - 
ship is stronger. If the market rallies to a new high and NH-NL rises to a new 
peak, it shows that bullish leadership is growing and the uptrend is likely to 
196 STOCK MARKET INDICATORS 
L 
, Standard & Poor's 500 
Jbwhf/l 
 Sell 
1 r 
A BCDEF 
ew High-New Low lndex 
Figure 37-1. New High-New Low lndex 
Stocks making new highs for the year are the leaders in strength, and 
stocks making new lows are the leaders in weakness. NH-NL measures 
the direction and intensity of market leadership by comparing the num- 
ber of new highs and new lows. 
In the summer of 1987, mass bullishness rose to a high pitch, as the 
bull market roared into its final peak. It was safe to hold stocks as long as 
each new high in the stock market was confirmed by a new peak in the 
New High-New Low lndex (A, B, C, D, and E). The August peak in the 
stock market was accompanied by a bearish divergence (E-F) in the NH- 
NL Index, giving a sell signal. 
When the stock market declined in September, many traders went 
bargain hunting. Five years of rising prices had trained them to use 
declines for buying. NH-NL, meanwhile, pointed to a severe weakness. 
It peaked out at only 100 (G), indicating weakness. NH-NL turned nega- 
tive in October (H). It gave repeated sell signals in advance of the his- 
toric crash. 
continue. If the market rallies but NH-NL shrinks, it shows that the uptrend is 
in trouble. A regiment whose officers are deserting is likely to turn and run. 
A new low in NH-NL shows that the downtrend is likely to persist. If 
officers are running faster than men, the regiment is likely to be routed. If 
stocks fall but NH-NL turns up, it shows that officers are no longer running. 
37. NEW HIGH-NEW LOW INDEX 197 
When officers regain their morale, the whole regiment is likely to rally 
(Figures 37-2 and 37-3). 
Trading Rules 
Traders need to pay attention to three aspects of NH-NL, listed here in the 
order of their importance: divergences between the peaks and bottoms of 
NH-NL and prices, the trend of NH -NL, and the level of NH-NL above or 
below its centerline. 
Standard & Pmh 500 
! 
 A 
\w7, 
B 
 C 
D 
+vb 
buy 
t 
New High-New Low lndex 
v c an e 
." 328 
.. 
.. 
.. 3e0 
272 
244 
216 
96 
-246 
-588 
-929 
+ -1271 
Figure 37-2. New High-New Low lndex 
The stock market crashed in October 1987, and the number of new lows 
exploded, reaching nearly 1300 (A). The stock market bounced ("a dead 
cat bounce ") and fell back to its lows (0). The newspapers were filled 
with alarmist articles, wondering whether this was the end of the 
Western financial system as we knew it. NH-NL flashed a much more 
optimistic message. It showed that new lows were shrinking-the officers 
were refusing to run. The market retested its lows in December (C), and 
NH-NL traced an even stronger bullish divergence, giving a buy signal. It 
was confirmed when NH-NL crossed into positive territory (D). This was 
the beginning of a 2-year bull market. 
198 STOCK MARKET INDICATORS 
Standard & Poor's 500 
Figure 37-3. New High-New Low Index 
The New High-New Low lndex gives its best messages when it diverges 
from prices. This chart shows what happened prior to the 1989 mini- 
crash and how the recovery began. 
The market reached a new peak in August (A), accompanied by a 
new peak in NH-NL, which indicated that the market was likely to go 
higher. The rally in September (B) was accompanied by a bearish diver- 
gence that gave a sell signal. The market struggled to a new high in 
October (C), but NH-NL made a lower peak, repeating its sell signal. 
NH-NL turned negative one day prior to the crash, forcefully confirming 
its sell signal. 
The October low (D) was followed by a reflex rally ("a dead cat 
bounce"), and then prices twice retested their October lows (E, F). On 
both occasions, NH-NL made more shallow bottoms than in October. 
These bullish divergences gave buy signals, and a new uptrend began. 
L 
As long as a price peak is confirmed by a new high in NH-NL, the rally is 
likely to continue, even if it is punctuated by a decline. When low prices are 
accompanied by new lows in NH-NL, it means that bears are in control and 
the downtrend is likely to continue. Divergences between NH-NL and broad 
37. NEW HIGH-NEW LOW INDEX 199 
market averages provide the best trading signals. A trend that loses its lead- 
ers is likely to reverse. 
1. If NH-NL traces a lower peak while the market rallies to a new high, it 
creates a bearish divergence. This shows that bullish leadership is 
weakening even though the broad market is higher. Bearish diver - 
gences mark the ends of uptrends. If the last peak in NH-NL is about 
+I00 or less, then a major reversal is probably at hand and it is time to 
get short. If the latest peak is much higher than 
+loo, then the upside 
leadership is strong enough to prevent the market from collapsing. 
2. If NH-NL traces a more shallow bottom while the market declines to a 
new low, it creates a bullish divergence. This shows that bearish lead - 
ership is shrinking, even though the market is lower. If the latest low 
in NH-NL is near -100, it shows that the bearish leadership is 
exhausted and a major upside reversal is near. If the latest low is much 
lower than -100, then bears still have some strength, and the down- 
trend may pause but not reverse. Keep in mind that bullish diver- 
gences at stock market bottoms tend to develop faster than bearish 
divergences at market tops: Buy fast and sell slowly. 
The slope of NH-NL on any given day is defined by the trend of its bars 
for the last few days. When the market rallies and NH-NL rises, it confirms 
uptrends. When NH-NL declines together with the market, it confirms 
downtrends. 
3. A rise in NH-NL shows that it is safe to hold long positions and add to 
them. If NH-NL declines while the broad market stays flat or rallies, it 
is time to take profits on short-term long positions. When NH-NL 
falls, it shows that the bearish leadership is strong and it is safe to hold 
short positions and even add to them. If the market continues to fall 
but NH-NL rises, the downtrend is in question-it is time to cover 
shorts. 
4. If NH-NL rises on a flat day, it flashes a bullish message and gives a 
buy signal. It shows that officers are going over the top while the sol - 
diers are still crouching in their foxholes. When NH-NL falls on a flat 
day, it gives a signal to sell short. It shows that officers are deserting 
while the troops are still holding their positions. Soldiers are not 
stupid - if the officers run, they will not stay and fight. 
200 STOCK MARKET INDICATORS 
The position of NH-NL in relation to its centerline shows whether bulls or 
bears are in control. When NH-NL is above its centerline, it shows that more 
market leaders are bullish than bearish. Then it is better to trade the stock 
market from the long side. When NH -NL is below its centerline, it shows 
that bearish leadership is stronger, and it is better to trade from the short side. 
NH-NL can stay above its centerline for months at a time in bull markets and 
below its centerline for months at a time in bear markets. 
5. If NH-NL stays negative for several months but then rallies above its 
centerline, it signals that a bull move is likely to begin. Then it is time 
to look for buying opportunities, using oscillators for precise timing. If 
NH-NL stays positive for several months but then falls below its cen - 
terline, it shows that a bear move is likely to begin. Then it is time to 
look for shorting opportunities using oscillators for precise timing. 
More on NH-NL 
Old analysts used to smooth NH-NL using 10-day and 30 -day simple mov- 
ing averages. When a 10-day MA of NH-NL crossed above a 30-day MA, it 
gave a buy signal. When a 10-day MA crossed below a 30-day MA, it gave a 
sell signal. Raw NH-NL gives clearer signals, but if you still want to smooth 
NH-NL, it is better to use exponential moving averages. 
The number of new highs and new lows is reported daily by the New 
York Stock Exchange, the American Stock Exchange, the Over-the-counter 
Exchange, and the London Stock Exchange. Most overseas stock 
exchanges do not report these numbers, but a computer-equipped analyst 
should have no difficulty creating NH-NL for any market. Traders who use 
NH-NL outside of the United States get an edge over competitors who lack 
this indicator. You need to obtain one year's worth of daily data for every 
stock on the exchange you follow and update that file daily. Program your 
computer to examine your database each day and flag those stocks that have 
reached a new high or a new low for the past 52 weeks. 
NH-NL does not work in the stock markets dominated by a handful of 
stocks. For example, hundreds of stocks are listed on the Milan Stock 
Exchange in Italy, but only 2 of them - FIAT and Generale - represent 
nearly 70 percent of total market capitalization. These two giants can over- 
ride the rest of the market. 
38. TRADERS' INDEX AND OTHER STOCK MARKET INDICATORS 201 
