38. TRADERS' INDEX AND OTHER STOCK MARKET INDICATORS 
The Traders' Index (TRIN) is a leading stock market indicator. It shows 
when major rallies and declines get ready to reverse by measuring the inten - 
sity of optimism of the dominant market group. Excessive optimism is asso - 
ciated with market tops and excessive pessimism with bottoms. 
TRIN measures the ratio of advancing to declining stocks and compares it 
to the ratio of advancing to declining volume. This indicator was popularized 
by Richard Arms and is included in most quote systems. Any broker with a 
terminal on his desk can punch a few keys and see the latest TRIN. It is easy 
to calculate TRIN by hand or by using a computer at the end of each trading 
day. 
New market developments have changed TRIN over the years: listed 
stock options, index arbitrage, dividend recapture plays, and so on. The orig- 
inal interpretation of TRIN had to be adjusted, but TRIN continues to stand 
out as one of the best stock market indicators. It helps in timing stock trades 
as well as trades in stock index futures and options. 
How to Construct TRIN 
You need four pieces of data to calculate the Traders' Index: the number and 
volume of advancing and declining stocks as well as the volume of both 
groups. These figures are released by the New York Stock Exchange and 
several other exchanges throughout each trading session. 
Adv Issues Adv Volume 
TRIN = 
 1 
Decl Issues Decl Volume 
TRIN compares the relationship between the ratio of advancing and 
declining stocks and the ratio of advancing and declining volume (see work - 
sheet, Figure 38-1). If 1000 stocks rally on a volume of 100 million shares, 
and 1000 stocks decline on a volume of 100 million shares, then TRIN 
equals 1. If 1500 stocks go up on a volume of 150 million shares and 500 
stocks go down on a volume of 50 million shares, TRIN remains 1. 
TRIN falls when the volume of advancing stocks is disproportionately 
high, compared to their number. TRIN rises when the volume of declining 
stocks is disproportionately high, compared to their number. 
200 STOCK MARKET INDICATORS 
The position of NH-NL in relation to its centerline shows whether bulls or 
bears are in control. When NH -NL is above its centerline, it shows that more 
market leaders are bullish than bearish. Then it is better to trade the stock 
market from the long side. When NH-NL is below its centerline, it shows 
that bearish leadership is stronger, and it is better to trade from the short side. 
NH-NL can stay above its centerline for months at a time in bull markets and 
below its centerline for months at a time in bear markets. 
5. If NH-NL stays negative for several months but then rallies above its 
centerline, it signals that a bull move is likely to begin. Then it is time 
to look for buying opportunities, using oscillators for precise timing. If 
NH-NL stays positive for several months but then falls below its cen - 
terline, it shows that a bear move is likely to begin. Then it is time to 
look for shorting opportunities using oscillators for precise timing. 
More on NH-NL 
Old analysts used to smooth NH-NL using 10-day and 30-day simple mov - 
ing averages. When a 10-day MA of NH-NL crossed above a 30-day MA, it 
gave a buy signal. When a 10-day MA crossed below a 30-day MA, it gave a 
sell signal. Raw NH-NL gives clearer signals, but if you still want to smooth 
NH-NL, it is better to use exponential moving averages. 
The number of new highs and new lows is reported daily by the New 
York Stock Exchange, the American Stock Exchange, the Over-the-counter 
Exchange, and the London Stock Exchange. Most overseas stock 
exchanges do not report these numbers, but a computer-equipped analyst 
should have no difficulty creating NH -NL for any market. Traders who use 
NH-NL outside of the United States get an edge over competitors who lack 
this indicator. You need to obtain one year's worth of daily data for every 
stock on the exchange you follow and update that file daily. Program your 
computer to examine your database each day and flag those stocks that have 
reached a new high or a new low for the past 52 weeks. 
NH-NL does not work in the stock markets dominated by a handful of 
stocks. For example, hundreds of stocks are listed on the Milan Stock 
Exchange in Italy, but only 2 of them - FIAT and Generale - represent 
nearly 70 percent of total market capitalization. These two giants can over- 
ride the rest of the market. 
38. TRADERS' INDEX AND OTHER STOCK MARKET INDICATORS 201 
38. TRADERS' INDEX AND OTHER STOCK 
MARKET INDICATORS 
The Traders' Index (TRIN) is a leading stock market indicator. It shows 
when major rallies and declines get ready to reverse by measuring the inten - 
sity of optimism of the dominant market group. Excessive optimism is asso - 
ciated with market tops and excessive pessimism with bottoms. 
TRIN measures the ratio of advancing to declining stocks and compares it 
to the ratio of advancing to declining volume. This indicator was popularized 
by Richard Arms and is included in most quote systems. Any broker with a 
terminal on his desk can punch a few keys and see the latest TRIN. It is easy 
to calculate TRIN by hand or by using a computer at the end of each trading 
day. 
New market developments have changed TRIN over the years: listed 
stock options, index arbitrage, dividend recapture plays, and so on. The orig- 
inal interpretation of TRIN had to be adjusted, but TRIN continues to stand 
out as one of the best stock market indicators. It helps in timing stock trades 
as well as trades in stock index futures and options. 
How to Construct TRIN 
You need four pieces of data to calculate the Traders' Index: the number and 
volume of advancing and declining stocks as well as the volume of both 
groups. These figures are released by the New York Stock Exchange and 
several other exchanges throughout each trading session. 
Adv Issues Adv Volume 
TRIN = / 
Decl Issues Decl Volume 
TRIN compares the relationship between the ratio of advancing and 
declining stocks and the ratio of advancing and declining volume (see work - 
sheet, Figure 38-1). If 1000 stocks rally on a volume of 100 million shares, 
and 1000 stocks decline on a volume of 100 million shares, then TRIN 
equals 1. If 1500 stocks go up on a volume of 150 million shares and 500 
stocks go down on a volume of 50 million shares, TRIN remains 1. 
TRIN falls when the volume of advancing stocks is disproportionately 
high, compared to their number. TRIN rises when the volume of declining 
stocks is disproportionately high, compared to their number. 
202 STOCK MARKET INDICATORS 
S&P 500 
-- 
Figure 38-1. Traders' Index (TRIN) Worksheet 
TRIN tracks the ratio of advancing to declining stocks and compares it 
with the ratio of advancing to declining volume. It works best when it is 
smoothed with an exponential moving average, such as a 13-day EMA. Date 
The volume of advancing stocks often swells out of proportion to their 
number during rallies. If the ratio of advancing to declining issues is 2:1, but 
the ratio of advancing to declining volume is 4:1, then TRIN equals 0.50 (211 
+ 411). A low TRIN shows that bulls are highly optimistic, a rally is being 
overdone, and a top is near. 
When the market falls, the volume of declining stocks often swells out of 
proportion to their number. If the ratio of advancing to declining issues is 
1:2, but the ratio of advancing to declining volume is 1:4, then TRIN equals 
2 (112 + 114). A high TRIN shows that bears are too optimistic, too much 
volume goes into the declining stocks, a decline is being overdone, and the 
market is nearing a bottom. 
TRIN can change sharply from day to day. TRIN gives better signals 
when it is smoothed with a moving average. You can use a 13-day exponen- Adv Vol I Decl Vol TRIN:l 
I TRIN: 13-EMA * 
.................................................................. Adv 
8374 j 7107 
i .87 
i Decl ................................................................................ 
6/04 , 784 765 
6/05 661 
 1 895 ...................................................................................................... 
6/06 
 ! 681 
1 861 7162 f 9418 .97 ! 
0 .............. 
9 ............................ 
6339 f 8783 
i 1.10 
i 
6/07 [ 445 
1 1113 [ 3251 f 11771 
1 1.45 
i 
6/10 648 905 4230 ! 6644 1.12 f ................................................................................ ........... " ................ '" ............ " .................... 
611 1 , 868 680 9371 4831 .66 
38. TRADERS' INDEX AND OTHER STOCK MARKET INDICATORS 203 
tial moving average of daily TRIN (see Section 25). It filters out the noise of 
daily swings and shows the true trend of this indicator. For the rest of this 
chapter, the term TRIN is used as shorthand for 13 -day EMA of daily TRIN. 
Plot TRIN on an inverted vertical scale. Low numbers on the top identify 
market peaks, and high numbers at the bottom identify market lows. Two 
horizontal reference lines mark overbought and oversold levels. When TRIN 
rises above its upper reference line, it shows that the stock market is over - 
bought and nearing a top. When TRIN falls below its lower reference line, it 
shows that the market is oversold and nearing a bottom. 
The level of reference lines depends on whether the stocks are in a bull or 
bear market or a neutral trading range. The overbought line is usually placed 
at 0.65 or 0.70 in bull markets, 0.70 or 0.75 in bear markets. The oversold 
line is placed at 0.90 or 0.95 in bull markets, 1.00 or 1.10 in bear markets. 
These levels may shift by the time you read this book-use them as a start- 
ing point for your own research. 
The best way to draw reference lines is to examine a chart of an index 
such as the S&P 500 for the past six months, along with TRIN. Mark all 
important tops and bottoms of the S&P 500 and draw two reference lines 
that cut across the corresponding tops and bottoms of TRIN. When TRIN 
enters those extreme areas again, you will know that the market has entered 
a reversal zone. Adjust oversold and overbought lines every three months. 
Crowd Psychology 
The stock market is a manic-depressive beast-it swings from expansive 
mania to fearful depression. The mood of a manic-depressive patient goes 
through cycles. When he reaches the bottom of depression, his mood starts 
to improve. When he rises to the height of mania, he starts to slow down. 
Traders can use TRIN to diagnose manic and depressive episodes in the 
stock market and bet on their reversals (see Figure 38-2). 
Crowds are emotional and short-term oriented. Trends often go farther 
than you expect because crowds act out their feelings and run instead of act- 
ing rationally. Trends reverse when masses of traders get tired of running. 
TRIN shows when they become exhausted. 
If bulls become greedy during a rally, they buy so many shares that 
advancing volume swells out of proportion with the number of advancing 
stocks. When TRIN rises above its upper reference line it shows that mass 
optimism has risen to a level associated with tops. 
204 STOCK MARKET INDICATORS 
368 
348 
337 
325 
314 
-8,68 
-8,78 
-8,89 
-8,99 
-1,H 
Figure 38-2. Traders' Index (TRIN) 
When the volume of rising stocks rises out of proportion to their number, 
it reflects bullish enthusiasm, and TRlN becomes overbought. It rises and 
then flashes a sell signal when it leaves its overbought zone. When the 
volume of declining stocks becomes too large relative to their number, 
TRlN becomes oversold. It gives a buy signal when it leaves its oversold 
zone. 
TRlN gives its best buy and sell signals when it diverges from the pat- 
tern of the S&P 500 index. The market rose higher in October than in 
September, but TRlN reached a lower top, giving a strong sell signal. 
After the October fall, the market retested its bottom in November, but a 
much higher bottom in TRlN showed that bears were out of breath. This 
bullish divergence gave a strong buy signal. At the right edge of the 
chart, the market is strong but TRlN is nowhere near overbought-hold 
longs. 
If bears dump shares during a decline, then downside volume swells out 
of proportion with the number of declining stocks. When TRIN falls below 
its lower reference line, it shows that bearishness is being overdone and an 
upside reversal is near. 
38. TRADERS' INDEX AND OTHER STOCK MARKET INDICATORS 205 
Changes of TRIN are similar to what happens during rush hours at a sub- 
urban commuter train station. In the morning, the departure platform gets 
overcrowded, while at night there is a crowd at the arriving platform. The 
biggest crowd identifies the peak of the trend-either into the city or back 
home. You can identify traffic reversals by measuring the number of com- 
muters crowding a platform. That is what TRIN does in the stock market. 
TRIN identifies rush hours in uptrends and downtrends. It flags bullish 
extremes at stock market tops and bearish extremes at market bottoms. TRIN 
identifies mood swings of the stock market crowd. Professionals use this 
information because they tend to trade against deviations and for a return to 
normalcy. 
Trading Rules 
TRIN is plotted on an inverted scale. High numbers mark the bottoms and 
low numbers signal market tops. TRIN hovers between 0.75 to 0.85 in neu- 
tral markets. It is less than 1.0 because the volume of advancing stocks nor- 
mally exceeds the volume of declining stocks. People are normally more 
bullish than bearish. 
TRIN cannot be used mechanically - the same readings mean different 
things under different market conditions. Overbought and oversold readings 
are lower during bear markets and higher during bull markets. For example, 
TRIN of 0.60 marks great bullish strength at an early stage of a bull market. It 
tells you to look for every opportunity to add to long positions. The same read- 
ing of 0.60 during a rally in a bear market marks a major shorting opportunity. 
This is why it pays to adjust overbought and oversold lines every three months. 
1. Buy when TRIN leaves its oversold zone. When it crosses above its 
lower reference line, it shows that bears have run out of steam. Buying 
at this time is like betting on a traffic reversal after the rush hour. 
2. Sell when TRIN leaves its overbought zone. When TRIN sinks below 
its upper reference line, it shows that bulls are running out of breath. 
Selling short at this time is safer than trying to pick the exact top. 
3. TRIN works best when combined with the New High-New Low 
Index (see Section 37). If TRIN becomes oversold while NH-NL 
reaches a new low, it shows that bearish leadership is strong and the 
downtrend is likely to continue. If TRIN becomes oversold but NH- 
206 STOCK MARKET INDICATORS 
NL traces a bullish divergence, it marks an important low. The com- 
bined signals of TRIN and NH-NL give traders confidence to buy a 
larger position. 
4. If TRIN becomes overbought but NH -NL rises to a new high, it shows 
that the upside leadership is strong and the uptrend is likely to con- 
tinue. If TRIN becomes overbought while NH -NL traces a bearish 
divergence, it often marks an important stock market top. Then you 
can short a larger position. 
TRIN gives its strongest buy and sell signals when it diverges from prices. 
5. When the stock market rises to a new high but TRIN traces a lower 
peak than it did during its previous rally, it shows that bulls are losing 
power. When bulls cannot purchase as many shares as before, the 
uptrend is in trouble. A bearish divergence between TRIN and the 
stock market gives a strong sell signal. 
6. When the stock market falls to a new low but TRIN flattens out at a 
more shallow level than during its previous decline, it shows that bears 
have fewer stocks to sell. When bears start losing power, the market is 
ready to rally. A bullish divergence between TRIN and the stock mar- 
ket gives a strong buy signal. 
More on TRIN 
The New York. Stock Exchange releases information on advancing and 
declining stocks and their volume throughout each trading session. Intraday 
TRIN can be used by day-traders. 
TRIN can be applied to any stock exchange that reports the numbers of 
advancing and declining stocks and their volume. When that data becomes 
available for overseas exchanges, the first traders to use it will have a com- 
petitive advantage. 
The 
AdvanceDecline line 
(AD line) measures mass participation in rallies 
and declines. If New Highs and New Lows are the officers, and the Dow 
38. TRADERS' INDEX AND OTHER STOCK MARKET INDICATORS 207 
Jones Industrials are the generals, then the A/D line shows whether or not 
the soldiers are following their leaders. A rally or decline is more likely to 
persist when the A/D line rises to a new high or falls to a new low in gear 
with the Dow. 
To calculate A/D for each day, subtract the number of declining stocks 
from the number of advancing stocks and ignore unchanged stocks. The 
result is positive or negative, depending on whether more stocks advanced or 
declined. For example, if 1900 stocks were traded, 900 advanced, 700 
declined, and 300 were unchanged, then 
 Advancemecline equals t200 (900 
- 700). Each day's 
 Advancemecline figures are added to the previous day's 
total, creating a cumulative A/D line. 
Traders should keep an eye on new peaks and valleys in the A/D line 
because its absolute level depends mostly on its starting date. Broadly based 
rallies and declines have greater staying power. If a new high in the stock 
market is accompanied by a new high in the 
AD line, it shows that the rally 
has broad support and is likely to continue. If the stock market reaches a new 
peak but the AID line reaches a lower peak than during the previous rally, it 
shows that fewer stocks are participating, and the rally may be near its end. 
When the market falls to a new low but the A/D line traces a more shallow 
bottom than during the previous decline, it shows that the decline is narrow- 
ing down and the bear move is nearing an end. These signals tend to precede 
reversals by weeks if not months. 
Most Active Stocks 
The Most Active Stocks indicator (MAS) is an 
advanceldecline line of the 
15 most active stocks on'the New York Stock Exchange. They are listed 
daily in many newspapers. Several large capitalization stocks, such as IBM, 
frequently appear on this list. Other stocks make the list only when they 
catch the public's eye due to an extremely positive or negative piece of 
news. MAS is a big money indicator - it shows whether big money is bullish 
or bearish. 
MAS for each day equals the number of the most active stocks that 
advanced minus the number of the most active stocks that declined. For 
example, if 9 of the most active stocks went up, 4 fell, and 2 were 
unchanged, then MAS for that day is 5 (9 - 4). Each day's MAS is added to 
the previous day's total, creating a cumulative MAS line. 
When MAS moves in the same direction as the broad stock market, it 
208 STOCK MARKET INDICATORS 
shows that big money supports the trend and it is likely to continue. When 
the market goes one way and MAS goes the other way, it shows that big 
money is betting on a reversal. When the trend of MAS diverges from the 
price trend, the market is especially likely to reverse. 
Other Stock Market Indicators 
Only a few stock market indicators have withstood the test of time. The New 
High-New Low Index and TRIN are probably the best stock market indica - 
tors, followed by 
AdvancePecline and Most Active Stocks. 
Old stock market books are full of fascinating indicators, but you have to 
be very careful using them today. Changes in the market over the years have 
killed many indicators. 
Indicators based on volume of low -priced stocks lost their usefulness 
when the average volume of the U.S. stock market soared tenfold and the 
Dow rose sixfold. The Member Short Sale Ratio and the Specialist Short 
Sale Ratio stopped working after options became popular. Member and spe- 
cialist short sales are now tied up in the intermarket arbitrage. Odd-lot 
statistics lost value when conservative odd-lotters bought mutual funds. The 
Odd-lot Short Sale Ratio stopped working when gamblers discovered puts. 
VII 
Psychological Indicators 
