39. CONSENSUS INDICATORS 
Many private traders keep their market opinions to themselves, but financial 
journalists and market letter writers spew them forth like open fire hydrants. 
Some writers are very bright, but both groups as a whole have poor trading 
records. 
Financial journalists and letter writers overstay important trends and miss 
major turning points. When these groups become bullish or bearish, it pays 
to trade against them. The behavior of groups is more primitive than individ- 
ual behavior. 
Consensus indicators, also known as contrary opinion indicators, are not 
as exact as trend-following indicators or oscillators. They simply draw your 
attention to the fact that a trend is ready to reverse. When you get that mes- 
sage, use technical indicators for more precise timing. 
As long as the market crowd remains in conflict, the trend can continue. 
When the crowd reaches a strong consensus, the trend is ready to reverse. 
When the crowd becomes highly bullish, it pays to get ready to sell. When 
the crowd becomes strongly bearish, it pays to get ready to buy. 
The foundations of the contrary opinion theory were laid by Charles 
Mackay, a Scottish barrister. He described in his book, Extraordinary 
Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds, crowd behavior during the 
Dutch Tulip Mania and the South Seas Bubble in England. Humphrey B. 
Neil1 applied the theory of contrary opinion to stocks and other financial 
210 PSYCHOLOGICAL INDICATORS 
markets. He explained in his book, The Art of Contrary Thinking, why the 
majority must be wrong at the market's major turning points. Prices are 
established by crowds, and by the time the majority turns bullish, there are 
not enough new buyers left to support a bull market. 
Abraham W. Cohen, a New York lawyer, came up with the idea of polling 
market advisors and using their responses as a proxy for the entire body of 
traders. Cohen was a skeptical man who spent many years on Wall Street and 
saw that the advisors as a group performed no better than the market crowd. 
In 1963, he established a service called Investors Intelligence for tracking 
market letter writers. When the majority of them became bearish, Cohen 
identified a buying opportunity. Selling opportunities were marked by strong 
bullishness among letter writers. James H. Sibbet applied this theory to com - 
modities. In 1964, he set up an advisory service called Market Vane. He 
studied the opinions of advisors and also weighed them in proportion to the 
numbers of their subscribers. 
Tracking Advisory Opinion 
Some letter writers are very smart, but taken as a group they are no better 
than average traders. They become very bullish at major tops and very bear- 
ish at major bottoms. Their consensus is similar to that of the trading crowd. 
Most letter writers follow trends because they are afraid to appear foolish 
and lose subscribers by missing a major move. The longer a trend continues, 
the louder letter writers bay at it. The advisors are most bullish at market 
tops and most bearish at market bottoms. When most letter writers become 
strongly bullish or bearish, it is a good idea to trade against them. 
Several rating services track the percentage of bulls and bears among 
advisors. The main rating services are Investors Intelligence in the stock 
market and Market Vane in the futures markets. Some advisors are very 
skilled at doubletalk. The man who speaks from both sides of his mouth can 
later claim that he was right regardless of the market's direction. Editors of 
Investors Intelligence and Market Vane have plenty of experience pinning 
down such lizards. As long as the same editor does the ratings, they remain 
internally consistent. 
Investors Intelligence 
Investors Intelligence was founded by Abe Cohen in 1963. He died in 1983, 
and his work is being continued by Michael Burke, the new editor and pub- 
39. CONSENSUS INDICATORS 21 1 
lisher. Investors Intelligence monitors about 130 stock market letters. It tabu- 
lates the percentage of bulls, bears, and fence-sitters among letter writers. 
The percentage of bears is especially important because it is emotionally 
hard for stock market writers to be bearish. 
When the percentage of bears among stock market letter writers rises 
above 55, the market is near an important bottom. When the percentage of 
bears falls below 15 and the percentage of bulls rises above 65, the stock 
market is near an important top. 
Market Vane 
Market Vane rates about 70 newsletters covering 32 markets. It rates each 
writer's degree of bullishness in each market on a 9-point scale. It multiplies 
these ratings by an estimated number of subscribers to each service (most 
advisors wildly inflate those numbers to appear more popular). A consensus 
report on a scale from 0 (most bearish) to 100 (most bullish) is created by 
adding the ratings of all advisors. When bullish consensus approaches 70 
percent to 80 percent, it is time to look for a downside reversal, and when it 
nears 20 percent to 30 percent, it is time to look to buy. 
The reason for trading against the extremes in consensus is rooted in the 
structure of the futures markets. The number of contracts bought long and 
sold short is always equal. For example, if open interest in gold is 12,000 
contracts, then 12,000 contracts are long and 12,000 contracts are short. 
While the number of long and short contracts is always equal, the number 
of individuals who hold them keeps changing. If the majority is bullish, then 
the minority, those who are short, has more contracts per person than the 
longs. If the majority is bearish, then the bullish minority has bigger posi - 
tions per person. The following example illustrates what happens when the 
consensus changes among 1000 traders who hold 12,000 contracts in one 
market. 
Open Bullish Number of Number of Contracts Contracts 
Interest Consensus Bulls Bears per Bull per Bear 
12,000 5 0 500 500 24 24 
12,000 80 800 200 15 60 
12,000 20 200 800 60 15 
1. If bullish consensus equals 50 percent, then 50 percent of traders are 
long and 50 percent are short. An average trader who is long holds as 
many contracts as an average trader who is short. 
21 2 PSYCHOLOGICAL INDICATORS 
.. 78 
D. Mark Weekly 
Bullish Consensus 0 
68 
55 
58 
45 
40 
38 35 
25 
Figure 39-1. Bullish Consensus 
The opinions of market advisors serve as a proxy for the opinions of the 
entire market crowd. The best time to buy is when the crowd is bearish, 
and the best time to go short is when the crowd is bullish. The levels of 
bullishness at which to buy or sell short vary from market to market. 
They need to be adjusted every few months. 
This weekly chart shows a bull market in the D. Mark, steadily mov- 
ing up between a trendline and a parallel channel line. Whenever 
bullish consensus fell below 45 percent during this bull market, it gave a 
buy signal. The lower the bullish consensus, the more explosive the sub- 
sequent rally! 
2. When bullish consensus reaches 80 percent, it shows that 80 percent 
of traders are long and 20 percent are short. Since the sizes of total 
long and total short positions are always equal, an average bear is 
short four times as many contracts as are held long by an average bull. 
This means that an average bear has four times more money than an 
average bull. The big money is on the short side of the market. 
3. When bullish consensus falls to 20 percent, it means that 20 percent of 
39. CONSENSUS INDICATORS 21 3 
traders are long and 80 percent are short. Since the numbers of long 
and short contracts are always equal, an average bull holds four times 
more contracts than are held by an average bear. It shows that big 
money is on the long side of the market. 
Big money did not grow big by being stupid. Big traders tend to be more 
knowledgeable and successful than average - otherwise they stop being big 
traders. When big money gravitates to one side of the market, think of trad- 
ing in that direction. 
To interpret bullish consensus in any market, obtain at least twelve 
months of historical data on consensus and note the levels at which the mar- 
ket has turned in the past (Figure 39 -1). Update these levels once every three 
months. The next time the market consensus becomes highly bullish, look 
for an opportunity to sell short using technical indicators. When the consen - 
sus becomes very bearish, look for a buying opportunity. 
Advisory opinion sometimes begins to change a week or two in advance 
of major trend reversals. If bullish consensus ticks down from 78 to 76, or if 
it rises from 25 to 27, it shows that the savviest advisors are abandoning 
what looks like a winning trend. This means that the trend is ready to 
reverse. 
Signals from the Press 
To understand any group of people, you must know what its members want 
and what they fear. Financial journalists want to appear serious, intelligent, 
and informed; they are afraid of appearing ignorant or flaky. It is normai for 
financial journalists to straddle the fence and present several sides of every 
issue. A journalist is safe as long as he writes something like "monetary pol- 
icy is about to push the market up, unless unforeseen factors push it down. " 
Internal contradiction is the normal state of affairs in financial journalism. 
Many financial editors are even bigger cowards than their writers. They print 
contradictory articles and call this "presenting a balanced picture." 
For example, a recent issue of Business Week had an article headlined 
"The Winds of Inflation Are Blowing a Little Harder " on page 19. The arti- 
cle stated that the end of a war was likely to push oil prices up. Another arti- 
cle on page 32 of the same issue was headlined "Why the Inflation Scare Is 
Just That." It stated that the end of a war was going to push oil prices down. 
Only a powerful and long -lasting trend can lure journalists and editors 
214 PSYCHOLOGICAL INDICATORS 
down from their fences. This happens when a wave of optimism or pes- 
simism sweeps the market at the end of a major trend. When journalists 
climb down from the fence and express strongly bullish or bearish views, the 
trend is ripe for a reversal. 
This is also the reason why the front covers of major business magazines 
are good contrarian indicators. When Business Week puts a bull on its cover, 
it is usually a good time to take profits on long positions in stocks, and when 
a bear graces the front cover, a bottom cannot be too far away. 5 ads fur platinum on The Wall 
Street Journal futures page 
Platinum 
1 
4 
h@ld"i 
4l ' 
+ 
I{ 
l/l@",P,~ No ads for platinum on The Wall 
!I,,/' Street Journal futures page 
T 
Signals from the Advertisers 
A group of three or more ads touting the same "opportunity " on the same 
page of a major newspaper often warns of a top (Figure 39-2). Only a well- llar 
~PP JWI kl 
Figure 39-2. Advertising as a Contrary Indicator 
By the time several firms prepare ads for the same product and place 
them in the same newspaper, the trend is ready to reverse. More than 
three ads for the same market on the same page is a bearish warning. '- 
.. 
.. 
:: 
:: 
:: 
.. .. .. 
.. 
660 
648 
620 
60E 
580 
568 
540 
528 
588 
488 
40. COMMITMENT INDICATORS 21 5 
established uptrend can break through the inertia of several brokerage 
firms. By the time all of them recognize a trend, come up with trading rec - 
ommendations, produce ads, and place them in a newspaper, that trend is 
very old. 
The ads on the commodities page of the Wall Street Journal appeal to the 
bullish appetites of the least-informed traders. Those ads almost never rec- 
omrnend'ielling; it is hard to get amateurs excited about going short. When 
three or more ads on the same day day tout opportunities in the same market, 
it is time to look at technical indicators for shorting signals. 
