40. COMMITMENT INDICATORS 
Several government agencies and exchanges collect data on buying and sell- 
ing by several groups of investors and traders. They publish summary 
reports of actual trades-commitments of money as well as ego. It pays to 
trade with those groups that have a track record of success and bet against 
those with poor track records. 
For example, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) 
reports long and short positions of hedgers and big speculators. Hedgers- 
the commercial producers and consumers of commodities-are the most 
successful participants in the futures markets. The Securities and Exchange 
Commission (SEC) reports purchases and sales by corporate insiders. 
Officers of publicly traded companies know when to buy or sell their com- 
pany shares. The New York Stock Exchange reports the number of shares 
bought, sold, and shorted by its members and by odd-lot traders. Members 
are more successful than small -time speculators. 
Commitments of Traders 
Traders must report their positions to the CFTC after they reach certain lev- 
els, called reporting levels. At the time of this writing, if you are long or 
short 100 contracts of corn or 300 contracts of the S&P 500 futures, the 
CFTC classifies you as a big speculator. Brokers send reports on positions 
that reach reporting levels to the CFTC. It compiles them and releases sum - 
maries once every two weeks. 
The CFTC also sets up the maximum number of contracts, called position 
21 6 PSYCHOLOGICAL INDICATORS 
limits, that a speculator is allowed to hold in any given market. At this time, 
a speculator may not be net long or short more than 2400 contracts of corn or 
500 contracts of the S&P 500 futures. These limits are set to prevent very 
large speculators from accumulating positions that are big enough to bully 
the markets. 
The CFTC divides all market participants into three groups: commercials, 
small speculators, and large speculators. Commercials, also known as 
hedgers, are firms or individuals who deal in actual commodities in the nor- 
mal course of business. In theory, they trade futures to hedge business risks. 
For example, a bank trades interest rate futures to hedge its loan portfolio, or 
a food processing company trades wheat futures to offset the risks of buying 
grain. Hedgers post smaller margins and are exempt from speculative posi - 
tion limits. 
Large speculators are those traders whose positions reach reporting lev- 
els. The CFTC reports buying and selling by commercials and large specula - 
tors. To find the positions of small traders, you need to subtract the hold - 
ings of the first two groups from the open interest. 
The divisions between hedgers, big speculators, and small speculators are 
somewhat artificial. Smart small traders grow into big traders, dumb big 
traders become small traders, and many hedgers speculate. Some market par- 
ticipants play games that distort the CFTC reports. For example, an acquain - 
tance who owns a brokerage firm sometimes registers his wealthy speculator 
clients as hedgers, claiming they trade stock index and bond futures to hedge 
their stock and bond positions. 
The commercials can legally speculate in the futures markets using inside 
information. Some of them are big enough to play futures markets against 
cash markets. For example, an oil firm may buy crude oil futures, divert sev - 
eral tankers, and hold them offshore in order to tighten supplies and push 
futures prices up. They can take profits on long positions, go short, and 
deliver several tankers at once to refiners in order to push crude futures 
down and cover shorts. This manipulation is illegal, and most firms hotly 
deny that it takes place. 
As a group, the commercials have the best track record in the futures mar- 
kets. They have inside information and are well -capitalized. It pays to follow 
them because they are successful in the long run. The few exceptions, such 
as orange juice hedgers, only confirm this rule. 
Big speculators used to be highly successful as a group until a decade or 
so ago. They used to be wealthy individuals who took careful risks with their 
own money. Today's big traders are commodity funds. These trend-follow- 
40. COMMITMENT INDICATORS 21 7 
ing behemoths do poorly as a group. The masses of small traders are the 
proverbial "wrong-way Corrigans7' of the markets. 
It is not enough to know whether a certain group is short or long. 
Commercials are often short futures because many of them own physical 
commodities. Small traders are usually long, reflecting their perennial opti - 
mism. To draw valid conclusions from the CFTC reports, you need to com - 
pare current positions to their historical norms. 
The modem approach to analyzing commitments of traders has been devel- 
oped by Curtis Arnold and popularized by Stephen Briese, publisher of the 
Bullish Review newsletter. These analysts measure deviations of current commit - 
ments from their historical norms. Bullish Review uses the following formula: 
Current Net - Minimum Net 
COT Index = 
Maximum Net - Minimum Net 
where COT Index = commitments of Traders Index. 
Current Net = the difference between commercial and 
speculative net positions. 
Minimum Net = the smallest difference between commer - 
cial and speculative net positions. 
Maximum Net = the largest difference between commercial 
and speculative net positions. 
Net Position = long contracts minus short contracts of any 
given group. 
When the COT Index rises above 90 percent, it shows that commercials 
are uncommonly bullish and gives a buy signal. When the COT Index falls 
below 10 percent, it shows that commercials are uncommonly bearish and 
gives a sell signal. 
Insider Trading 
Officers and investors who hold more than 5 percent of the shares in publicly 
traded companies must report their buying and selling to the Securities and 
Exchange Commission. The SEC tabulates insider buying and selling and 
releases this data to the public once a month. 
Corporate insiders have a record of buying stocks cheap and selling dear. 
Insider buying emerges after severe market drops, and insider selling accel - 
erates when the market rallies and becomes overpriced. 
218 PSYCHOLOGICAL INDICATORS 
Buying or selling by a single insider matters little. For example, an execu- 
tive may sell shares in his firm to meet major personal expenses or may buy 
shares to exercise stock options. Analysts who researched legal insider trad- 
ing found that insider buying or selling was meaningful only if more than 
three executives or large stockholders bought or sold within a month. These 
actions reveal that something very positive or negative is about to happen to 
the firm. A stock is likely to rise if three insiders buy in one month and to 
fall if three insiders sell within a month. 
Stock Exchange Members 
Membership in a stock exchange - particularly as a specialist - is a license 
to mint money. An element of risk does not deter generations of traders from 
paying hundreds of thousands of dollars for the privilege of planting their 
feet on a few square inches of a crowded floor. 
The Member Short Sale Ratio (MSSR) is the ratio of shorting by mem- 
bers to total shorting. The Specialist Short Sale Ratio (SSSR) is the ratio of 
shorting by specialists to shorting by members. These indicators used to 
serve as the best tools of stock market technicians. High readings of MSSR 
(over 85 percent) and SSSR (over 60 percent) showed that savvy traders 
were selling short to the public and identified stock market tops. Low read- 
ings of MSSR (below 75 percent) and SSSR (below 40 percent) showed that 
members were buying from the bearish public and identified stock market 
bottoms. These indicators became erratic in the 1980s. They were done in by 
the options markets, which gave exchange members more opportunities for' 
arbitrage. Now it is impossible to tell when their shorting is due to bearish - 
ness or to arbitrage plays. 
Odd-Lot Activity 
Odd-lotters are people who trade less than 100 shares of stock at a time - the 
small fry of the stock exchange. They remind us of a more bucolic time on 
Wall Street. Odd-lotters transacted one quarter of the exchange volume a 
century ago, and 1 percent as recently as two decades ago. Odd-lotters as a 
group are value investors. They buy when stocks are cheap and sell when 
prices rise. 
The indicators for tracking the behavior of odd-lotters were developed in 
40. COMMITMENT INDICATORS 21 9 
the 1930s. The Odd-Lot Sales Ratio measured the ratio of odd-lot sales to 
purchases. When it fell, it showed that odd -lotters were buying and the stock 
market was near the bottom. When it rose, it indicated that odd-lotters were 
selling and the stock market was near the top. 
The Odd-Lot Short Sale Ratio was a very different indicator. It tracked 
the behavior of short-sellers among odd -lotters, many of whom were gam - 
. blers. Very low levels of odd-lot short sales indicated that the market was 
near the top, and high levels of odd-lot short sales showed that the stock 
market was at a bottom. 
These indicators lost value as the financial scene changed in the 1970s 
and 1980s. The intelligent small investors moved their money into well-run 
mutual funds, and gamblers discovered that they could get more bang for 
their money in options. Now the New York Stock Exchange has a preferen- 
tial mechanism for filling odd -lot orders, and many professionals trade in 99- 
share lots. 
New Indicators 
