43. TRIPLE SCREEN TRADING SYSTEM 
The Triple Screen trading system was developed by this author and has been 
used for trading since 1985. It was first presented to the public in April 1986, 
in an article in Futures Magazine. 
Triple Screen applies three tests or screens to every trade. Many trades 
that seem attractive at first are rejected by one or another screen. Those 
trades that pass the Triple Screen test have a higher degree of profitability. 
Triple Screen combines trend-following methods and counter -trend tech - 
niques. It analyzes all potential trades in several timeframes. Triple Screen is 
more than a trading system, it is a method, a style of trading. 
Trend-Following Indicators and Oscillators 
Beginners often look for a magic bullet-a single indicator for making 
money. If they get lucky for a while, they feel as if they discovered the royal 
road to profits. When the magic dies, amateurs give back their profits with 
interest and go looking for another magic tool. The markets are too complex 
to be analyzed with a single indicator. 
Different indicators give contradictory signals in the same market. Trend- 
following indicators rise during uptrends and give buy signals, while oscilla - 
tors become overbought and give sell signals. Trend -following indicators 
2 36 TRADING SYSTEMS 
turn down in downtrends and give signals to sell short but oscillators become 
oversold and give buy signals. 
Trend-following indicators are profitable when markets are moving but 
lead to whipsaws in trading ranges. Oscillators are profitable in trading 
ranges, but give premature and dangerous signals when the markets begin to 
trend. Traders say: "The trend is your friend," and "Let your profits run." 
They also say: "Buy low, sell high." But why sell if the trend is up? And 
how high is high? 
Some traders try to average out the votes of trend-following indicators 
and oscillators. It is easy to rig this vote. If you use more trend -following 
tools, the vote will go one way, and if you use more oscillators, it will go the 
other way. A trader can always find a group of indicators telling him what he 
wants to hear. 
The Triple Screen trading system combines trend-following indicators 
with oscillators. It is designed to filter out their disadvantages while preserv - 
ing their strengths. 
Choosing 
 Tirneframes--The Factor of Five 
Another major dilemma is that the trend can be up and down at the same 
time, depending on what charts you use. A daily chart may show an uptrend 
while a weekly chart shows a downtrend, and vice versa (see Section 36). A 
trader needs to handle conflicting signals in different timeframes. 
Charles Dow, the author of the venerable Dow theory, stated at the turn of 
the century that the stock market had three trends. The long-term trend lasted 
several years, the intermediate trend several months, and anything shorter 
than that was a minor trend. Robert Rhea, the great market technician of the 
1930s, compared the three market trends to a tide, a wave, and a ripple. He 
believed that traders should trade in the direction of the market tide and take 
advantage of the waves but ignore the ripples. 
Times have changed, and the markets have become more volatile. Traders 
need a more flexible definition of timeframes. The Triple Screen trading sys - 
tem is based on the observation that every timeframe relates to the larger and 
shorter ones by approximately a factor of five (see Section 36). 
Each trader needs to decide which timeframe he wants to trade. Triple 
Screen calls that the intermediate timeframe. The long-term timeframe is 
one order of magnitude longer. The short-term timeframe is one order of 
magnitude shorter. 
43. TRIPLE SCREEN TRADING SYSTEM 237 
For example, if you want to carry a trade for several days or weeks, then 
your intermediate timeframe will be defined by the daily charts. Weekly 
charts are one order of magnitude longer, and they determine the long-term 
timeframe. Hourly charts are one order of magnitude shorter, and they deter - 
mine the short-term timeframe. 
Day-traders who hold their positions for less than an hour can use the 
same principle. For them, a 10 -minute chart may define the intermediate 
timeframe, an hourly chart the long -term timeframe, and a 2-minute chart the 
short-term timeframe. 
Triple Screen demands that you examine the long-term chart first. It 
allows you to trade only in the direction of the tide- the trend on the long - 
term chart. It uses the waves that go against the tide for entering positions. 
For example, daily declines create buying opportunities when the weekly 
trend is up. Daily rallies provide shorting opportunities when the weekly 
trend is down. 
First Screen-Market Tide 
Triple Screen begins by analyzing the long -term chart, one order of magni- 
tude greater than the one you plan to trade. Most traders pay attention only to 
the daily charts, with everybody watching the same few months of data. If 
you begin by analyzing weekly charts, your perspective will be five times 
greater than that of your competitors. 
The first screen of Triple Screen uses trend -following indicators to iden- 
tify long-term trends. The original system uses the slope of weekly MACD- 
Histogram (see Section 26) to identify the market tide. The slope is defined 
as the relationship between the two latest bars. When the slope is up, it 
shows that bulls are in control-it is time to trade from the long side. When 
the slope is down, it shows that bears are in control and tells you to trade 
only from the short side (Figure 43-1). 
A single uptick or a downtick of weekly MACD -Histogram indicates a 
change of a trend. The upturns that occur below the centerline give better 
buy signals than those above the centerline (See "Indicator Seasons" in 
Section 36). The downturns that occur above the centerline give better sell 
signals than the downturns below the centerline. 
Some traders use other indicators to identify maior trends. Steve Notis 
wrote an article in Futures magazine showing how he used the Directional 
System as the first screen of Triple Screen. Even a simpler tool, such as the 
238 TRADING SYSTEMS 
'I Gold Weekly 
b 
sen 
MACD-Histogram 2,8826 
buy buy .. 0,9884 
I. I 
,I II 
I I .. -0,2017 
Rising Falling .. -1,439 
T + -2,640 
Feb 
lCa~ Apr 
Nay Jun Jul Aug Sep Oet 
lh 
Figure 43-1. Weekly MACD-Histogram-The First Screen of 
Triple Screen 
The slope of MACD-Histogram is defined by the relationship between its 
two latest bars (see inset). Triple Screen tells traders to examine weekly 
charts before looking at the dailies. When the weekly trend is up, it 
allows us to trade only from the long side or stand aside. When the 
weekly trend is falling, it allows us only to trade from the short side or 
stand aside. 
Weekly MACD-Histogram gives a buy signal when its slope turns up. 
The best buy signals are given when this indicator turns up below its 
centerline. When MACD -Histogram turns down, it gives a sell signal. 
The best sell signals are given when it turns down from above its center- 
line (see "Indicator Seasons," Section 36). Once you find the trend of the 
weekly MACD -Histogram, turn to daily charts and look for trades in the 
same direction. 
slope of a 13-week exponential moving average, can serve as the first screen 
of the Triple Screen trading system. The principle is the same. You can use 
most trend-following indicators, as long as you analyze the trend on the 
weekly charts first and then look for trades on the daily charts only in that 
direction. 
43. TRIPLE SCREEN TRADING SYSTEM 239 
Screen One: Identify the weekly trend using a trend-following indica - 
tor and trade only in its directkn. 
A trader has three choices: buy, sell, or stand aside. The first screen of the 
Triple Screen trading system takes away one of those choices. It acts as a 
censor who permits you only to buy or stand aside during major uptrends. It 
allows you only to sell short or stand aside during major downtrends. You 
have to swim with the tide or stay out of the water. 
Second Screen-Market Wave 
The second screen identifies the wave that goes against the tide. When the 
weekly trend is up, daily declines point to buying opportunities. When the 
weekly trend is down, daily rallies point to shorting opportunities. 
The second screen applies oscillators to the daily charts in order to iden - 
tify deviations from the weekly trend. Oscillators give buy signals when 
markets decline and sell signals when markets rise. The second screen of the 
Triple Screen trading system allows you to take only those daily signals that 
point in the direction of the weekly trend. 
Screen Two: Apply an oscillator to a daily chart. Use daily declines 
during weekly uptrends to find buying opportunities and daily rallies 
during weekly downtrends to find shorting opportunities. 
When the weekly trend is up, Triple Screen takes only buy signals from 
daily oscillators and ignores their sell signals. When the weekly trend is 
down, Triple Screen takes only shorting signals from oscillators and ignores 
their buy signals. Force Index and Elder -ray are good oscillators to use with 
Triple Screen, but Stochastic and Williams %R also perform well. 
When the weekly 
MACD-Histogram rises, the Zday EMA of Force Index 
(see Chapter 8) gives buy signals when it falls below its centerline, as long as it 
does not fall to a new multiweek low. When the weekly MACD -Histogram 
declines, Force Index gives shorting signals when it rallies above its centerline, 
as long as it does not rise to a new multiweek high Figure 43-2). 
When the weekly trend is up, daily Elder -ray-(see Section 41) gives a buy 
signal when Bear Power declines below zero and then ticks back up toward 
240 TRADING SYSTEMS 
Figure 43-2. Daily Force Index-The Second Screen of Triple 
Screen 
The 2day EMA of Force lndex is one of several oscillators that can work 
as the second screen of the Triple Screen trading system. Force lndex 
marks buying opportunities when it falls below its centerline. It marks 
selling opportunities when it rallies above its centerline. 
When the weekly trend is up, take only buy signals from the daily 
oscillator for entering long positions. When the weekly trend is down, 
take only sell signals for entering short positions. At the right edge of the 
chart, the weekly trend has turned down. Wait for a rise in Force lndex 
in order to sell short. 
the centerline. When the weekly trend is down, daily Elder-ray signals to go 
short when Bull Power rallies above zero and then ticks back down. 
Stochastic (see Section 30) gives trading signals when its lines enter a buy 
or a sell zone. When weekly 
 MACD-Histogram rises but daily Stochastic 
falls below 30, it identifies an oversold area, a buying opportunity. When the 
weekly MACD -Histogram declines but daily Stochastic rises above 70, it 
identifies an overbought area, a shorting opportunity. 
Williams %R (see Section 29) needs a 4- or 5-day window to work with 
Triple Screen. It is interpreted similarly to Stochastic. The Relative Strength 
43. TRIPLE SCREEN TRADING SYSTEM 241 
Index does not react to price changes as fast as other oscillators. It helps with 
overall market analysis, but is too slow for Triple Screen. 
Third Screen-lntraday Breakout 
The first screen of the Triple Screen trading system identifies market tide on 
a weekly chart. The second screen identifies a wave that goes against that 
tide on a daily chart. The third screen identifies the ripples in the direction of 
the tide. It uses intraday price action to pinpoint entry points. 
The third screen does not require a chart or an indicator. It is a technique 
for entering the market after the first and second screens gave a signal to buy 
' or sell short. The third screen is called a trailing buy -stop technique in 
uptrends and a trailing sell-stop technique in downtrends (Figure 43-3). 
When the weekly trend is up and the daily trend is down, trailing buy- 
stops catch upside breakouts. When the weekly trend is down and the daily 
trend is up, trailing sell-stops catch downside breakouts. 
Triple Screen Summary 
Weekly Trend Daily Trend Action Order 
UP UP Stand aside None 
UP Down Go long Trailing buy -stop 
Dowri Down Stand aside None 
Down 
 u P Go short Trailing sell-stop 
When the weekly trend is up and a daily oscillator declines, it activates a 
trailing buy -stop technique. Place a buy order one tick above the high of the 
previous day. If prices rally, you will be stopped in long automatically when 
the rally takes out the previous day's high. If prices continue to decline, your 
buy-stop will not be touched. Lower your buy order the next day to the level 
one tick above the latest price bar. Keep lowering your buy-stop each day until 
stopped in or until the weekly indicator reverses and cancels its buy signal. 
When the weekly trend is down, wait for a rally in a daily oscillator to 
activate a trailing sell-stop technique. Place an order to sell short one tick 
below the latest bar's low. As soon as the market turns down, you will be 
stopped in on the short side. If the rally continues, keep raising your sell 
order daily. The aim of a trailing sell -stop technique is to catch an intraday 
downside breakout from a daily uptrend in the direction of a weekly down- 
trend. 
r 
370,0 
366.1 
362,2 
358.3 
354.4 
350,6 
34.7 
342,8 
338.9 
335,U 
Figure 43-3. Trailing Buy-Stop-The Third Screen of Triple 
Screen 
Weekly MACD -Histogram has turned up in 
midSeptember. When the 
first screen points up, every decline of the second screen-the 2-day EMA 
of Force Index-marks a buying opportunity. 
a. Force lndex falls below its centerline. Place a buy order for tornor- 
row 1 tick above the high of day a. 
b. The decline continues. Lower the buy order to 1 tick above the 
high of bar b. 
c. Bought at the opening. Place a stop at the low of bar b. The new 
high in Force lndex shows that the rally is strong, likely to continue. 
d. Force lndex falls below its centerline. Place a buy order at the bar's 
high. 
e. Bought when prices rallied above the high of d. Place a stop at the 
low of bar d. 
f. Force lndex falls below its centerline. Place a buy order at the bar's 
high. 
g. Decline continues. Lower the buy-stop to within 1 tick of the high 
of bar g. 
h. Bought when prices rallied above the high of g. Place a stop at the 
low of bar g. 
i. Force lndex falls below its centerline. Place a buy order at the bar's 
high. 
j. Decline continues. Lower the buy-stop to within 1 tick of the high 
of bar j. 
k. Bought at the opening. Place a stop at the low of bar j. 
I. Gold opens lower and hits the protective stop. It is important to use 
stops because no indicator is perfect. 
1 
43. TRIPLE SCREEN TRADING SYSTEM 
Screen Three: Use the trailing buy-stop technique when the weekly 
trend is up and the daily oscillator is down. Use the trailing sell-stop 
techniquemwhen the weekly trend is down and the daily oscillator is 
up: 
Stop-Loss 
Proper money management is essential for successful trading. A disciplined 
trader cuts his losses short and outperforms a loser who keeps hanging on 
and hoping. The Triple Screen trading system calls for placing very tight 
stops. 
, As soon as you buy, place a stop -loss order one tick below the low of the 
trade day or the previous day, whichever is lower. Once you sell short, place 
a protective stop -loss one tick above the high of the trade day or the previous 
day, whichever is higher. Move your stop to a break -even level as soon as the 
market moves in your favor. Afterwards, the rule of thumb is to move your 
stop to protect approximately 50 percent of paper profits (see Section 48). 
The reason for using such tight stops is that Triple Screen trades only in 
the direction of the tide. If a trade does not work out fast, it is a sign that 
something is fundamentally changing below the surface of the market. Then 
it is better to run fast. The first loss is the best loss-it allows you to re- 
examine the market from the safety of the sidelines. 
Conservative traders should go long or short on the first signal of the 
Triple Screen trading system and stay with that position until the major trend 
reverses or until stopped out. Active traders can use each new signal from 
the daily oscillator for pyramiding the original position. 
A position trader should try and stay with a trade until the weekly trend 
reverses. A short -term trader may take profits using signals from the second 
screen. For example, if a trader is long and Force Index becomes positive or 
Stochastic rises to 70 percent, he may sell and take profits, then look for 
another buying opportunity. 
The Triple Screen trading system combines different timeframes and sev- 
eral types of indicators. It uses a trend -following indicator with the long-term 
charts and a short -term oscillator with the intermediate charts. It uses special 
entry techniques for buying or selling short. It also uses tight money man- 
agement rules. 
TRADING SYSTEMS 
