44. PARABOLIC TRADING SYSTEM 
The Parabolic trading system was described in 1976 by J. Welles Wilder, Jr. 
It was named after the pattern of its stops during runaway moves, which 
resembled a parabola. The Parabolic system is now included in many soft - 
ware packages. 
Parabolic aims to catch trends and to reverse positions when trends 
reverse. Its unique feature is that it responds to the passage of time as well 
as to changing prices. Most traders focus on prices but ignore time (see 
Section 36). 
How to Construct Parabolic 
Parabolic is a reversal system, designed to keep a trader in the market all the 
time. When Parabolic stops you out of a long position, it tells you to go short 
at the same price. If it stops you out of a short position, it tells you to go long 
at the same price and time. This method worked well during the inflationary 
markets of the 1970s, but has led to many whipsaws in later years. Now 
Parabolic should be used selectively, only when markets are trending. 
Parabolic is based on a good old rule - move your stops only in the direc- 
tion of the trade and never against it. If you are long, you may raise your 
stops but never lower them. If you are short, you may only lower your stops. 
Parabolic stops are set daily, using a formula: 
where Stoptday = the current stop. 
Stoptomo, = the stop for the next trading day. 
EPtrade = the extreme point reached by the market in the 
current trade. If a trader is long, EP is the highest 
high reached since the day he bought. If a trader is 
short, EP is the lowest low reached since the 
day he went short. 
AF = the acceleration factor. This unique tool deter- 
mines how fast to move a stop in the direction of a 
trend. AF depends on the number of new highs 
since the entry into a long trade or the number of 
new lows since the entry into a short trade. 
On the first day in a trade, Acceleration Factor equals 0.02. This means 
that the stop is moved by 2 percent of the distance between the extreme point 
44. PARABOLIC TRADING SYSTEM 245 
and the original stop. AF increases by 0.02 each day the rally reaches a new 
high or a decline reaches a new low, up to the maximum of 0.20. 
If the market reaches 3 higher highs during a long trade, AF equals 0.08 
[0.02 + (0.02 3)], and if the market reaches 9 new highs, AF rises to its 
maximum of 0.20, or 0.02 + (0.02 9). In the latter case, the daily stop gets 
moved by 20 percent of the distance between the extreme point of the trade 
and the latest stop. 
In the beginning of a trade, Acceleration Factor is small and stops move 
slowly. As the market reaches new highs or new lows, AF increases and 
stops move fast. If the market does not reach new highs or lows, AF keeps 
moving stops in the direction of the trade. By doing so, Parabolic forces 
traders to get out of trades that go nowhere. 
Many traders change the Acceleration Factor. They adjust the size of the 
basic 0.02 step and the 0.20 maximum size of AF. Some increase them to 
make the system more sensitive, others decrease them to make the system 
react slower. The size of a step often varies from 0.015 to 0.025 and the 
maximum size of AF from 0.18 to 0.23. 
Trading Psychology 
Losers go broke by hanging onto losing positions and hoping for a reversal. 
The Parabolic system protects traders from indecision and imposes an iron 
discipline on them. It sets a stop the moment you enter a trade and tells you 
to move it in the direction of the trade. 
If you go long or short but prices remain flat, it gives you a message that 
your timing was wrong. You would not have bought or shorted unless you 
expected prices to move right after you put on a trade! Parabolic does not let 
you hang onto a trade that goes nowhere. It moves stops in the direction of 
the trade, saying in effect "Put up or shut up." 
The Parabolic system is extremely useful during runaway trends. When 
prices soar or crash without a pullback, it is hard to place stops using normal 
chart patterns or indicators. Parabolic is the best tool for placing stops under 
those conditions. 
Trading Rules 
When you begin using Parabolic in any given market, go back several weeks 
to calculate its stops. Adjust Parabolic stops daily, with one exception: If it 
tells you to move the stop into the previous day's range, don't do it. Stops 
should be kept outside of the previous day's range. 
246 TRADING SYSTEMS 
Step=0.02 AF=0.20 
Figure 44-1. Parabolic System 
Parabolic works well when the markets are moving, but not when the 
markets are flat. If you get whipsawed twice in a row, it signals a flat 
market. Stop using Parabolic, but continue to track it on paper until you 
get two good signals. 
Parabolic shines in fast-moving markets. Here it took most of the 
profit out of a 30+ point run in IBM and its subsequent decline, with a 
single whipsaw in April. Two whipsaws in a row in May gave a signal to 
stop using Parabolic. 
The Parabolic system works well in trending markets but leads to whip 
saws in trendless markets. It can generate spectacular profits during price 
trends but chop up an account in a trading range. Do not use it as an auto- 
matic trading method. 
The original Parabolic was a true reversal system. When a trader was long 
one contract, it told him to place an order to sell two contracts if his stop was 
hit. Then he sold his long position and automatically went short. When a 
trader was short one contract, Parabolic told him to place an order to buy two 
if his stop was hit. Then he covered his short position and went long. 
A trader is better off entering the market using some other trading 
method, such as the Triple Screen trading system, and then switching to 
45. CHANNEL TRADING SYSTEMS 247 
Parabolic only if he finds himself riding a dynamic uptrend or a downtrend 
(Figure 44-1). 
1. When you find yourself in a strong uptrend, go over the past several 
weeks of data and apply the Parabolic system. Having updated 
Parabolic to the current day, begin calculating stops daily and use 
them to protect profits on your long position. 
2. When you find yourself short in a fast downtrend, apply Parabolic to 
the past several weeks of data and update it to the present day. From 
that day on, calculate its stops daily to protect profits on your short 
position. 
The Parabolic system ties together price and time and moves stops in the 
direction of the trade. The faster the trend, the faster Parabolic moves its 
stops. Parabolic is an excellent tool for getting the most out of a strong trend 
that was entered using any method. 
