47. MONEY MANAGEMENT 
Suppose you and I bet a penny on a coin flip: Tails, you win, heads, you lose. 
Suppose you have $10 of risk capital and I have $1. Even though I have less 
money, I have little to fear-it would take a string of 100 losses to wipe me 
out. We can play for a long time, unless two brokers get between us and 
drain our capital by commissions and slippage. 
258 RISK MANAGEMENT 
The odds will dramatically change if you and I raise our bet to a quarter. If 
I have only $1, then a string of only four losses will destroy me. If you have 
$10, you can afford to lose a quarter 40 times in a row. A series of four 
losses is likely to come much sooner than forty. All other factors being 
equal, the poorer of two traders is the first to go broke. 
Most amateurs think that "other factors" are far from equal. They consider 
themselves brighter than the rest of us. The trading industry works hard to 
reinforce that delusion, telling traders that winners get the money lost by 
losers. They try to hide the fact that trading is a minus-sum game (see 
Section 3). Cocky amateurs take wild risks, producing commissions for bro- 
kers and profits for floor traders. When they blow themselves out of the mar- 
ket, new suckers come in because hope springs eternal. 
Survival First 
The first goal of money management is to ensure survival. You need to avoid 
risks that can put you out of business. The second goal is to earn a steady 
rate of return, and the third goal is to earn high returns - but survival comes 
first. 
"Do not risk thy whole wad" is the first rule of trading. Losers violate it 
by betting too much on a single trade. They continue to trade the same or 
even a bigger size during a losing streak. Most losers go bust trying to trade 
their way out of a hole. Good money management can keep you out of the 
hole in the first place. 
The deeper you fall, the more slippery your hole. If you lose 10 percent, 
you need to gain 11 percent to recoup that loss, but if you lose 20 percent, 
you need to gain 25 percent to come back. If you lose 40 percent, you need 
to make a whopping 67 percent, and if you lose 50 percent, you need to 
make 100 percent simply to recover. While losses grow arithmetically, the 
profits that are required to recoup them increase geometrically. 
You have to know in advance how much you can lose - when and at what 
level you will cut your loss. Professionals tend to run as soon as they smell 
trouble and re -enter the market when they see fit. Amateurs hang on and 
hope. 
Get Rich Slowly 
An amateur trying to get rich quick is like a monkey out on a thin branch. He 
reaches for a ripe fruit but crashes when the branch breaks under his weight. 
47. MONEY MANAGEMENT 259 
Institutional traders as a group tend to be more successful than private 
traders. They owe it to their bosses, who enforce discipline (See Section 14). 
If a trader loses more than his limit on a single trade, he is fired for insubor - 
dination. If he loses his monthly limit, his trading privileges are suspended 
for the rest of the month and he becomes a gofer, fetching other traders cof - 
fee. If he loses his monthly limit several times in a row, the company either 
fires or transfers him. This system makes institutional traders avoid losses. 
Private traders have to be their own enforcers. 
An amateur who opens a $20,000 trading account and expects to run it 
into a million in two years is like a teenager who runs away to Hollywood to 
become a pop singer. He may succeed, but the exceptions only confirm the 
rule. Amateurs try to get rich quick but destroy themselves by taking wild 
risks. They may succeed for a while but hang themselves, given enough 
rope. 
Amateurs often ask me what percentage profit they can make annually 
from trading. The answer depends on their skills or lack of such and market 
conditions. Amateurs never ask a more important question: "How much will 
I lose before I stop trading and re -evaluate myself, my system, and the mar - 
kets?" If you focus on handling losses, profits will take care of themselves. 
A person who makes 25 percent profit annually is a king of Wall Street. 
Many top -flight money managers would give away their firstborn child to be 
able to top this. A trader who can double his money in a year is a star-as 
rare as a pop musician or a top athlete. 
If you set modest goals for yourself and achieve them, you can go very 
far. If you can make 30 percent annually, people will beg you to manage 
their money. If you manage $10 million -not an outlandish amount in 
today's markets-your management fee alone can run 6 percent of that, or 
$600,000 a year. If you make a 30 percent profit, you will keep 15 percent of 
it as an incentive fee- another $450,000. You will earn over a million dol - 
lars a year trading, without taking big risks. Keep these numbers in mind 
when you plan your next trade. Trade to establish the best track record, with 
steady gains and small drawdowns. 
How Much to Risk 
Most traders get killed by one of two bullets: ignorance or emotion. 
Amateurs act on hunches and stumble into trades that they should never take 
due to negative mathematical expectations. Those who survive the stage of 
virginal ignorance go on to design better systems. When they become more 
260 RISK MANAGEMENT 
confident, they lift their heads out of the foxholes-and the second bullet 
hits them! Confidence makes them greedy, they risk too much money on a 
trade, and a short string of losses blows them out of the market. 
If you bet a quarter of your account on each trade, your ruin is guaranteed. 
You will be wiped out by a very short losing streak, which happens even 
with excellent trading systems. Even if you bet a tenth of your account on a 
trade, you will not survive much longer. 
A professional cannot afford to lose more than a tiny percentage of his 
equity on a single trade. An amateur has the same attitude toward trading as 
an alcoholic has toward drinking. He sets out to have a good time, but winds 
up destroying himself. 
Extensive testing has shown that the maximum amount a trader may lose on 
a single trade without damaging his long-term prospects is 2 percent of his 
equity. This limit includes slippage and commissions. If you have a $20,000 
account, you may not risk more than $400 on any trade. If you have a 
$100,000 account, you may not risk more $2000 on a trade, but if you have 
only $10,000 in your account, then you can risk no more than $200 on a trade. 
Most amateurs shake their heads when they hear this. Many have small 
accounts and the 2 percent rule throws a monkey wrench into the dreams of 
quick profits. Most successful professionals, on the other hand, consider the 
2 percent limit too high. They do not allow themselves to risk more than 1 
percent or 1.5 percent of their equity on any single trade. 
The 2 percent rule puts a solid floor under the amount of damage the market 
can do to your account. Even a string of five or six losing trades will not crip- 
ple your prospects. In any case, if you are trading to create the best track 
record, you will not want to show more than a 6 percent or 8 percent monthly 
loss. When you hit that limit, stop trading for the rest of the month. Use this 
cooling-off period to reexamine yourself, your methods, and the markets. 
The 2 percent rule keeps you out of riskier trades. When your system 
gives an entry signal, check to see where to place a logical stop. If that 
would expose more than 2 percent of your account equity -pass up that 
trade. It pays to wait for trades that allow very close stops (see Chapter 9). 
Waiting for them reduces the excitement of trading but enhances profit 
potential. You choose which of the two you really want. 
The 2 percent rule helps you decide how many contracts to trade. For 
example, if you have $20,000 in your account, you may risk up to $400 per 
trade. If your system flags an attractive trade with a $275 risk, then you may 
trade only one contract. If the risk is only $175, then you can afford to trade 
two contracts. 
47. MONEY MANAGEMENT 261 
What about pyramiding - increasing the size of your trading positions as 
a trade moves in your favor? The 2 percent rule helps here too. If you show 
profit on a trend-following position, you may add to it, as long as your 
existing position is at a break-even level or better and the risk on the addi- 
tional position does not exceed 2 percent of your equity. 
Martingale Systems 
Once you set your maximum risk per trade, you have to decide whether to 
risk the same amount on every trade. Most systems vary the amount of 
money at risk from trade to trade. One of the oldest money management sys - 
tems is the martingale, originally developed for gambling. It has you bet a 
greater amount after a loss, in order to "come back." Needless to say, this 
approach has a great emotional appeal to losers. 
A martingale player in a casino keeps betting $1 as long as he wins, but if 
he loses, he doubles up and bets $2. If he wins, he ends up with a $1 profit 
(-$I + $2) and goes back to betting $1. If he loses, he doubles up again and 
bets $4. If he wins, he gets a $1 profit (-$I, -$2, +$4), but if he loses, he 
doubles up and bets $8. As long as he keeps doubling up, his very first win 
will cover all his losses and return a profit equal to his original bet. 
A martingale system sounds like a no-lose proposition, until you realize 
that a long run of bad trades will wipe out every gambler, no matter how 
rich. At the extreme, a gambler who starts betting $1 and has 46 losses in a 
row, has to bet $70 trillion on his 47th bet-more than the net worth of the 
entire world (about $50 trillion). He is sure to run out of money or hit the 
house limit much sooner than that. A martingale system is futile if you have 
a negative or even-money expectation. It is self -defeating if you have a win- 
ning system and a positive expectation. 
Amateurs love martingale systems because of their emotional appeal. 
There is a common superstition that you can get unlucky only up to a point 
and that bad luck is bound to change. Losers often trade more heavily after a 
drawdown. A loser fighting to come back often doubles his trading size after 
a loss. This is a very poor method of money management. 
If you want to vary your trading size, logic requires you to trade more 
when your system is in gear with the market and making money. As your 
account grows, the 2 percent rule allows you to trade larger amounts. You 
should trade less when your system is out of sync with the market and losing 
money. 
262 RISK MANAGEMENT 
Optimal f 
Some traders who develop computerized trading systems believe in trading 
what they call the optimal f- an "optimal fixed fraction " of the account. The 
fraction of capital they risk on any trade depends on a formula that is based 
on the performance of their trading system and their account size. It is a 
complex method, but whether you use it or not, you can borrow several 
sound ideas from it. 
Ralph Vince has shown in his book, Portfolio Management Formulas, 
that: (1) optimal f keeps changing; (2) if you trade more than optimalf, you 
gain no benefit and are virtually certain to go broke; (3) if you trade less than 
optimal f, your risk decreases arithmetically but your profits decrease geo - 
metrically. 
Trading at the optimal f is emotionally hard because it can lead to 85 per- 
cent drawdowns. It should be attempted only with true risk capital. The key 
point here is that if you trade more than the optimal fraction, you are certain 
to destroy your account. The lesson is: When in doubt, risk less. 
Computerized testing of money management rules has confirmed several 
old-timers' rules and observations. The true measure of any system's finan - 
cial risk is its biggest losing trade. A drawdown depends on the length of an 
adverse run, which can never be predicted. Diversification can buffer the 
drawdowns. You can diversify by trading different markets and using differ - 
ent systems. Closely related markets such as currencies offer no diversifica - 
tion. A small trader is forced to follow a simple rule: Put all your eggs into 
one basket and watch it like a hawk. 
According to Vince, computer testing has proven several common 
money management rules: Never average down; never meet a margin call; 
if you must lighten up, liquidate your worst position; the first mistake is 
the cheapest. 
Reinvesting Profits 
Pay attention to what you feel when you handle profits. Many traders feel 
tom between a craving for a bigger and faster buck and a fear of losing. A 
professional trader calmly removes some money from his account, just as 
any other professional draws an income from his work. An amateur who 
fearfully grabs a profit and buys something with it before he can lose it 
shows little confidence in his ability to make money. 
Reinvesting can turn a winning system into a losing one, but no method of 
48. EXITING TRADES 263 
reinvesting profits can turn a losing system into a winning one. Leaving 
profits in your account allows you to make money faster by trading more 
contracts or being able to establish long -term positions using wider stops. 
Removing some of your profits provides a cash flow. The government also 
wants its share in taFes. 
There is no hard and fast rule for splitting your profits between reinvest - 
ment and personal use. It depends on your personality and the size of your 
trading account. If you start with a small account, such as $50,000, you will 
not want to drain profits from it. When your account is well into six figures, 
you may begin treating it as an income-producing business. 
You will need to make important personal decisions. Do you need 
$30,000 or $300,000 a year to live on? Are you willing to cut spending in 
order to leave more in your account? The answers to these questions depend 
on your personality. Make sure to use your intellect and not your emotions 
when you make these decisions. 
