5. FANTASY VERSUS REALITY 
If you hear from a friend with little farming experience that he plans to feed 
himself with food grown on a quarter-acre plot, you will expect him to go 
hungry. We all know that one can squeeze only so much blood from a turnip. 
The one field in which grown -ups let their fantasies soar is trading. 
Just the other day, a friend told me that he expected to support himself 
trading his $6000 account. When I tried to show him the futility of his plan, 
he quickly changed our topic of conversation. He is a bright analyst, but he 
refuses to see that his "intensive farming " plan is suicidal. In his desperate 
effort to succeed, he must take on large positions -and the slightest wiggle 
of the market is sure to put him out of business. 
A successful trader is a realist. He knows his abilities and limitations. He 
sees what is happening in the markets and knows how to react to them. He 
5. FANTASY VERSUS REALITY 13 
I 
analyzes the markets without cutting comers, observes his own reactions, 
and makes realistic plans. A professional trader cannot afford illusions. 
Once an amateur takes a few hits and gets a few margin calls, he becomes 
fearful instead of cocky and starts developing strange ideas about the mar- 
kets. Losers buy, sell, or miss trades thanks to their fantastic ideas. They act 
like children who are afraid to pass a cemetery or look under their bed at 
night because they are afraid of ghosts. The unstructured environment of the 
market makes it is easy to develop fantasies. 
Most people who have grown up in Western civilization have several sim - 
ilar fantasies. They are so widespread that when I studied at the New York 
Psychoanalytic Institute, there was a course called "Universal Fantasies. " 
For example, most people have a fantasy in childhood that they were 
adopted rather than born to their parents. A fantasy seems to explain the 
unfriendly and impersonal world. It consoles a child but prevents him from 
seeing reality. Our fantasies influence our behavior, even if we are not con - 
sciously aware of them. 
In talking to hundreds of traders, I keep hearing them express several uni- 
versal fantasies. They distort reality and stand in the way of trading success. 
A successful trader must identify his fantasies and get rid of them. 
The Brain Myth 
Losers who suffer from the "brain myth" will tell you, "I lost because I 
didn't know trading secrets." Many losers have a fantasy that successful 
traders have some secret knowledge. This fantasy helps support a lively mar- 
ket in advisory services and ready-made trading systems. 
A demoralized trader often whips out his checkbook and goes shopping 
for "trading secrets. " He may send money to a charlatan for a $3000 "can't 
miss," backtested, computerized trading system. When that self -destructs, he 
sends another check for a "scientific manual " that explains how he can stop 
being a loser and become a true insider and a winner by 
 contetnplating the 
Moon, Saturn, or even Uranus. 
The losers do not know that trading is intellectually fairly simple. It is less 
demanding than taking out an appendix, building a bridge, or trying a case in 
court. Good traders are often shrewd, but few of them are intellectuals. Many 
have not been to college, and some have even dropped out of high school. 
Intelligent and hardworking people who have succeeded in their careers 
often feel drawn to trading. The average client of a brokerage firm is 50 
14 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY 
years old, is married, and has a college education. Many have postgraduate 
degrees or own their businesses. The two largest professional groups among 
traders are engineers and farmers. 
Why do these intelligent and hardworking people fail in trading? What 
separates winners from losers is neither intelligence nor secrets, and cer- 
tainly not education. 
The Undercapitalization Myth 
Many losers think that they would be successful if they could trade a bigger 
account. All losers get knocked out of the game by a string of losses or a sin - 
gle abysmally bad trade. Often, after the amateur is sold out, the market 
reverses and moves in the direction he expected. The loser is ready to kick 
either himself or his broker: Had he survived another week, he might have 
made a small fortune! 
Losers take this reversal as a confirmation of their methods. They earn, 
save, or borrow enough money to open another small account. The story 
repeats: The loser gets wiped out, the market reverses and "proves" the loser 
right, but only too late - he has been sold out again. That's when the fantasy 
is born: "If only I had a bigger account, I could have stayed in the market a 
little longer and won." 
Some losers raise money from relatives and friends by showing them a 
paper track record. It seems to prove that they would have won big, if only 
they had had more money to work with. But if they raise more money, they 
lose that, too - it is as if the market were laughing at them! 
A loser is not undercapitalized - his mind is underdeveloped. A loser can 
destroy a big account almost as quickly as a small one. He overtrades, and 
his money management is sloppy. He takes risks that are too big, whatever 
the size of his account. No matter how good his system is, a streak of bad 
trades is sure to put him out of business. 
Traders often ask me how much money they need to begin trading. They 
want to be able to withstand a drawdown, a temporary drop in the account 
equity. They expect to lose a large amount of money before making any! 
They sound like an engineer who plans to build several bridges that collapse 
before erecting his masterpiece. Would a surgeon plan on killing several 
patients while becoming an expert at taking out an appendix? 
A trader who wants to survive and prosper must control his losses. You do 
5. FANTASY VERSUS REALITY 15 
that by risking only a tiny fraction of your equity on any single trade (see 
Chapter 10, "Risk Management "). Give yourself several years to learn how 
to trade. Do not start with an account bigger than $20,000, and do not lose 
more than 2 percent of your equity on any single trade. Learn from cheap 
mistakes in a small account. 
Amateurs neither expect to lose nor are in any way prepared for it. The 
notion of being undercapitalized is a cop-out that helps them avoid two 
painful truths: their lack of trading discipline, and their lack of a realistic 
money management plan. 
The one advantage of a large trading account is that the price of equip- 
ment and services represents a smaller percentage of your money. A man- 
ager of a million-dollar fund who spends $10,000 on computers and semi- 
nars is only 1 percent behind the game. The same expenditure would 
represent 50 percent of the equity of a trader with a $20,000 account. 
The Autopilot Myth 
Imagine that a stranger walks into your driveway and tries to sell you an 
automatic system for driving your car. Just pay a few hundred dollars for a 
computer chip, install it in your car, and stop wasting energy on driving, he 
says. You can take a nap in the driver's seat while the "Easy Swing System" 
whisks you to work. You would probably laugh the salesman out of your 
driveway. But would you laugh if he tried to sell you an automatic trading 
system? 
Traders who believe in the autopilot myth think that the pursuit of wealth 
can be automated. Some try to develop an automatic trading system, while 
others buy one from the experts. Men who have spent years honing their 
skills as lawyers, doctors, or businessmen plunk down thousands of dollars 
for canned competence. They are driven by greed, laziness, and mathemati - 
cal illiteracy. 
Systems used to be written on sheets of paper, but now they usually come 
on copy-protected diskettes. Some are primitive; others are elaborate, with 
built-in optimization and money management rules. Many traders spend 
thousands of dollars searching for magic that will turn a few pages of com- 
puter code into an endless stream of money. People who pay for automatic 
trading systems are like medieval knights who paid alchemists for the secret 
of turning base metals into gold. 
16 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY 
Complex human activities do not lend themselves to automation. 
Computerized learning systems have not replaced teachers, and programs for 
doing taxes have not created unemployment among accountants. Most 
human activities call for an exercise of judgment; machines and systems can 
help but not replace humans. So many system buyers have been burned that 
they have formed an organization, Club 3000, named after the price of many 
systems. 
If you could buy a successful automatic trading system, you could move 
to Tahiti and spend the rest of your life in leisure, supported by a stream of 
checks from your broker. So far, the only people who have made money 
from trading systems are the system sellers. They form a small but colorful 
cottage industry. If their systems worked, why would they sell them? They 
could move to Tahiti themselves and cash checks from their brokers! 
Meanwhile, every system seller has a line. Some say they like programming 
better than trading. Others claim that they sell their systems only to raise 
trading capital. 
Markets always change and defeat automatic trading systems. Yesterday's 
rigid rules work poorly today and will probably stop working tomorrow. A 
competent trader can adjust his methods when he detects trouble. An auto- 
matic system is less adaptable and self -destructs. 
Airlines pay high salaries to pilots despite having autopilots. They do it 
because humans can handle unforeseen events. When a roof blows off an air- 
liner over the Pacific or when a plane runs out of gas over the Canadian 
wilderness, only a human can handle such a crisis. These emergencies have 
been reported in the press, and in each of them experienced pilots managed 
to land their airliners by improvising. No autopilot can do that. Betting your 
money on an automatic system is like betting your life on an autopilot. The 
first unexpected event will destroy your account. 
There are good trading systems out there, but they have to be monitored 
and adjusted using individual judgment. You have to stay on the ball-you 
cannot abdicate your responsibility for your success to a trading system. 
Traders who have the autopilot fantasy try to repeat what they felt as 
infants. Their mothers used to fulfill their needs for food, warmth, and com- 
fort. Now they try to re-create the experience of passively lying on their 
backs and having profits flow to them like an endless stream of free, warm 
milk. 
The market is not your mother. It consists of tough men and women who 
look for ways to take money away from you instead of pouring milk into 
your mouth. 
6. MARKET GURUS 17 
The Personality Cult 
Most people give lip service to their wish for freedom and independence. 
When they come under pressure, they change their tune and start looking for 
"strong leadership." Traders in distress often seek directions from assorted 
gurus. 
When I was growing up in the former Soviet Union, children were taught 
that Stalin was our great leader. Later we found out what a monster he had 
been, but while he was alive, most people enjoyed following the leader. He 
freed them from the need to think for themselves. 
"Little Stalins" were installed in every area of society-in economics, 
biology, architecture, and so on. When I came to the United States and began 
to trade, I was amazed to see how many traders were looking for a guru- 
their "little Stalin" in the market. The fantasy that someone else can make 
you rich deserves its own discussion later in this chapter. 
Trade with Your Eyes Open 
Every winner needs to master three essential components of trading: a sound 
individual psychology, a logical trading system, and a good money manage - 
ment plan. These essentials are like three legs of a stool-remove one and 
the stool will fall, .together with the person who sits on it. Losers try to build 
a stool with only one leg, or two at the most. They usually focus exclusively 
on trading systems. 
Your trades must be based on clearly defined rules. You have to analyze 
your feelings as you trade, to make sure that your decisions are intellectually 
sound. You have to structure your money management so that no string of 
losses can kick you out of the game. 
