6. MARKET GURUS 
Gurus have been with us ever since the public entered markets. In 1841, the 
classic book on market manias, Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the 
Madness of Crowds, was published in England. It is still in print today. Its 
author, Charles Mackay, described the Dutch Tulip Mania, the South Seas 
Bubble in England, and other mass manias. Human nature changes slowly, 
'This section originally appeared as an article, "Market Gurus, " in the September 1990 issue of Fumres 
and Options World London, U.K. (81990 by Alexander Elder. 
18 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY 
and today new mass manias, including gum manias, continue to sweep the 
markets. 
Gum manias spring up faster now than they did centuries ago, thanks to 
modern telecommunications. Even educated and intelligent investors and 
traders follow market gums, like the devotees of the false Messiahs in the 
Middle Ages. 
There are three types of gurus in the financial markets: market cycle 
gums, magic method gums, and dead gums. Some gums call important mar- 
ket turns. Others promote "unique methods9'-new highways to riches. Still 
others have escaped criticism and invited cult following through the simple 
mechanism of departing this world. 
Market Cycle Gurus 
For many decades, the U.S. stock market has generally followed a four -year 
cycle. Significant bear market lows occurred in 1962, 1966, 1970, 1974, 
1978, and 1982. The broad stock market has normally spent 2.5 or 3 years 
going up and 1 or 1.5 years going down. 
A new market cycle gum emerges in almost every major stock market 
cycle, once every 4 years. A gum's fame tends to last for 2 to 3 years. The 
reigning period of each guru coincides with a major bull market in the 
United States. 
A market cycle gum forecasts all major rallies and declines. Each correct 
forecast increases his fame and prompts even more people to buy or sell 
when he issues his next forecast. As more and more people take notice of the 
gum, his advice becomes a self -fulfilling prophecy. When you recognize a 
hot new guru, it pays to follow his advice. 
There are thousands of analysts, some of whom are certain to be on a hot 
streak at any given time. Most analysts become hot at some point in their 
careers for the same reason a broken clock shows the right time twice a day. 
Those who have tasted the joy of being on a hot streak sometimes feel 
crushed when it ends and they wash out of the market. But there are enough 
old foxes who enjoy their occasional hot streaks, yet continue working as 
usual after their hot streak ends. 
The success of a market cycle gum depends on more than short-term luck. 
He has a pet theory about the market. That theory-cycles, volume, Elliott 
Wave, whatever- is usually developed several years prior to reaching star - 
dom. At first, the market refuses to follow an aspiring gum's pet theory. Then 
6. MARKET GURUS 19 
the market changes and for several years comes in gear with theory. That is 
when the star of the market guru rises high and bright above the marketplace. 
Compare this to what happens to fashion models as public tastes change. 
One year, blondes are popular, another year, redheads. Suddenly, last year's 
blonde star is no longer wanted for the front cover of a major women's mag- 
azine. Everybody wants a dark model, or a woman with a birthmark on her 
face. A model does not change - public tastes do. 
Gurus always come from the fringes of market analysis. They are never 
establishment analysts. Institutional employees play it safe and never 
achieve spectacular results because each uses similar methods. A market 
cycle guru is an outsider with a unique theory. 
A guru usually earns a living publishing a newsletter and can grow rich 
selling his advice. Subscriptions can soar from a few hundred annually to 
tens of thousands. A recent market cycle guru was reported to have hired 
three people just to open the envelopes with money pouring into his firm. 
At investment conferences, a guru is surrounded by a mob of admirers. If 
you ever find yourself in such a crowd, notice that a guru is seldom asked 
questions about his theory. His admirers are content to drink in the sound of 
his voice. They brag to their friends about having met him. 
A guru remains famous for as long as the market behaves according to his 
theory-usually for less than the duration of one 4-year market cycle. At 
some point the market changes and starts marching to a different tune. A 
guru continues to use old methods that worked spectacularly well in the past 
and rapidly loses his following. When the guru's forecasts stop working, 
public admiration turns to hatred. It is impossible for a discredited market 
cycle guru to return to stardom. 
The reigning guru in the early 1970s was Edson Gould. He based his fore- 
casts on policy changes of the Federal Reserve, as reflected in the discount 
rate. His famous rule of "three steps and a stumble" stated that if the Federal 
Reserve raised the discount rate three times, that showed tightening and led 
to a bear market. Lowering the discount rate in three steps revealed a loosen - 
ing of the monetary policy and led to a bull market. Gould also developed an 
original charting technique called speedlines- shallow trendlines whose 
angles depended on the velocity of a trend and the depth of market reactions. 
Gould became very hot during the bear market of 1973-1974. He vaulted 
to prominence after correctly calling the December 1974 bottom, when the 
Dow Jones Industrials fell to near 500. The market rocketed higher, Gould 
presciently identified its important turning points using speedlines, and his 
fame grew. But soon the United States was flooded with liquidity, inflation 
20 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY 
intensified, and Gould's methods, developed in a different monetary environ - 
ment, stopped working. By 1976, he had lost most of his following, and few 
people today even remember his name. 
The new market cycle guru emerged in 1978. Joseph Granville stated that 
changes in stock market volume preceded changes in prices. He expressed it 
colorfully: "Volume is the steam that makes the choo-choo go." Granville 
developed his theory while working for a major Wall Street brokerage firm. 
He wrote in his autobiography that the idea came to him while sitting on a 
toilet contemplating the design of floor tiles. Granville took his idea from the 
bathroom to the chartroom, but the market refused to follow his forecasts. 
He went broke, got divorced, and slept on the floor of his friend's office. By . 
the late 1970s, the market started to follow Granville's scripts as never 
before or since, and people began to take notice. 
Granville toured the United States speaking to overflow crowds. He 
arrived on stage in a camage, issued forecasts, and chided "bagholders" who 
would not recognize his theory. He played piano, sang, and, on occasion, 
even dropped his pants to make a point. His forecasts were spectacularly cor - 
rect; he drew attention to himself and became widely quoted in the mass 
media. Granville became big enough to move the stock market. When he 
announced that he was bearish, the Dow dropped over 40 points in a day - a 
huge decline by the standards of that time. Granville became intoxicated 
with his success. The market surged higher in 1982, but he remained very 
bearish and kept advising his dwindling band of followers to continue to sell 
short. The market rocketed higher into 1983. Granville finally gave up and 
recommended buying when the Dow doubled in value. He continued to pub- 
lish a market newsletter, a shadow of his former successful self. 
A new guru entered the spotlight in 1984. Robert Prechter has made a 
name for himself as an Elliott Wave theorist. Elliott was an impecunious 
accountant who developed his market theory in the 1930s. He believed that 
the stock market rallied in 5 waves and fell in 3 waves, which in turn could 
be subdivided into lesser waves. 
Like other market cycle gurus before him, Prechter had been writing an 
advisory letter for many years with modest success. When the bull market 
penetrated the 1000 level on the Dow, people began to pay attention to the 
young analyst who kept calling for the Dow to reach 3000. The bull market 
went from strength to strength, and Prechter7s fame grew by leaps and 
bounds. 
In the roaring bull market of the 1980s, Prechter's fame swept outside the 
narrow world of investment newsletters and conferences. Prechter appeared 
on national television and was interviewed by popular magazines. In October 
6. MARKET GURUS 2 1 
1987, he appeared to vacillate, first issuing a sell signal, then telling his fol- 
lowers to get ready to buy. As the Dow crashed 500 points, mass adulation 
of Prechter gave way to scorn and hatred. Some blamed him for the decline, 
others were angry that the market never reached his stated target of 3000. 
Prechter's advisory business shrank, and he largely retired from it. 
All market cycle gurus have several traits in common. They become 
active in the forecasting business several years prior to reaching stardom. 
Each has a unique theory, a few followers, and some credibility, conferred by 
sheer survival in the advisory business. The fact that each gum's theory did 
not work for a number of years is ignored by his followers. When the theory 
becomes correct, the mass media take notice. When a theory stops working, 
mass adulation of a gum turns to hatred. 
When you recognize that a successful new gum is emerging, it is prof- 
itable to jump on his bandwagon. It is even more important to recognize 
when a guru has reached his peak. All gurus crash- and by definition, they 
crash from the height of their fame. When a gum becomes accepted by the 
mass media, it is a sign that he has reached his crest. The mainstream media 
is wary of outsiders. When several mass magazines devote space to a hot 
market guru, you know that his end is near. 
Another warning sign that a market guru has reached his peak occurs 
when he is interviewed by Barron's-America's largest business weekly. 
Every January, Barron's invites a panel of prominent analysts to dispense 
wisdom and issue forecasts for the year ahead. The panel is usually made up 
of "safe" analysts who focus on 
pricelearnings ratios, emerging growth 
industries, and so on. It is highly atypical of Barron's to invite a hot gum 
with an offbeat theory to its January panel. A gum gets invited only when 
the public clamors for him, and to exclude him would diminish the prestige 
of the magazine. Both Granville and Prechter were invited to the January 
panel when each man was at the crest of his fame. Each guru fell within a 
few months of appearing on that panel. The next time a market guru is on 
Barron's January panel, do not renew your subscription to his newsletter. 
Mass psychology being what it is, new gums will certainly emerge. An 
old cycle gum never fully comes back. Once he stumbles, the adulation turns 
to derision and hatred. An expensive vase, once shattered, can never be fully 
restored. 
Magic Method Gurus 
Market cycle gurus are creatures of the stock market, but "method gurus" are 
more prominent in the derivative markets, especially in the futures markets. 
2 2 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY 
A "method guru " erupts on the financial scene after discovering a new ana- 
lytic or trading method. 
Traders always look for an edge, an advantage over fellow traders. Like 
knights shopping for swords, they are willing to pay handsomely for their 
trading tools. No price is too high if it lets them tap into a money pipeline. 
A magic method gum sells a new set of keys to market profits. As soon as 
enough people become familiar with a new method and test it in the markets, 
it inevitably deteriorates and starts losing popularity. Markets are forever 
changing, and the methods that worked yesterday are not likely to work 
today and even less likely to work a year from now. 
In the early 1970s, Chicago market letter writer Jake Bemstein became 
hot by using market cycles to call tops and bottoms. His methods worked 
well and his fame spread. Bernstein charged high fees for his newsletters, ran 
conferences, managed funds, and produced an endless flow of books. As 
usual, the markets changed, becoming less and less cyclical in the 1980s. 
Peter Steidlmayer was another method gum whose star rose high above 
Chicago. He urged his followers to discard old trading methods in favor of 
his Market Profile. That method promised to reveal the secrets of supply and 
demand and give true believers an ability to buy at the bottoms and sell at 
the tops. Steidlmayer teamed up with entrepreneur Kevin Koy, and their fre - 
quent seminars attracted upward of 50 people who paid $1600 for a 4-day 
class. There appeared to be no conspicuous examples of success among 
Market Profile devotees, and the founders had a nasty falling out. 
Steidlmayer got a job with a brokerage firm, and both he and Koy continued 
to give occasional seminars. 
Oddly enough, even in this era of fast global links, reputations change 
slowly. A guru whose image has been destroyed in his own country can 
make money peddling his theory overseas. That point has been made to me 
by a guru who compared his continued popularity in Asia to what happens 
to faded American singers and movie stars. They are unable to attract an 
audience in the United States, but they can still make a living singing 
abroad. 
Dead Gurus 
The third type of a market gum is a dead gum. His books are reissued, his 
market courses are scrutinized by new generations of eager traders, and the 
6. MARKET GURUS 23 
legend of the dear-departed analyst's prowess and personal wealth grows 
posthumously. The dead guru is no longer among us and cannot capitalize on 
his fame. Other promoters profit from his reputation and from expired copy - 
rights. One dear-departed guru is R. N. Elliott, but the best example of such a 
legend is W. D. Gann. 
Various opportunists sell "Gann courses" and "Gann software." They 
claim that Gann was one of the best traders who ever lived, that he left a $50 
million estate, and so on. I interviewed W. D. Gann's son, an analyst for a 
Boston bank. He told me that his famous father could not support his family 
by trading but earned his living by writing and selling instructional courses. 
When W. D. Gann died in the 1950s, his estate, including his house, was val- 
ued at slightly over $100,000. The legend of W. D. Gann, the giant of trad- 
ing, is perpetuated by those who sell courses and other paraphernalia to 
gullible customers. 
The Followers of Gurus 
The personalities of market gums differ. Some are dead, but those who are 
alive range from serious academic types to great showmen. A guru has to 
produce original research for several years, then get lucky when the market 
turns his way. 
To read about the scandals that surrounded many gurus, try Winner Takes 
All by William Gallacher and The Dow Jones Guide to Trading Systems by 
Bruce Babcock. The purpose of this section is simply analysis of the guru 
phenomenon. 
When we pay a guru, we expect to get back more than we spend. We act 
like a man who bets a few dollars against a three-card monte dealer on a 
street comer. He hopes to win more than he put down on an overturned crate. 
Only the ignorant or greedy take the bait. 
Some people turn to gurus in search of a strong leader. They look for a 
parent-like omniscient provider. As a friend once said, "They walk with their 
umbilical cords in hand, looking for a place to plug them in." A smart pro- 
moter provides such a receptacle, for a fee. 
The public wants gurus, and new gurus will come. As an intelligent tradel; 
you must realize that in the long run, no guru is going to make you rich. You 
have to work on that yourself. 
INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY 
