7. SELF-DESTRUCTIVENESS 
Trading is a very hard game. A trader who wants to be successful in the long 
run has to be very serious about what he does. He cannot afford to be naive 
or to trade because of some hidden psychological agenda. 
Unfortunately, trading often appeals to impulsive people, to gamblers, and 
to those who feel that the world owes them a living. If you trade for the 
excitement, you are liable to take trades with bad odds and accept unneces - 
sary risks. The markets are unforgiving, and emotional trading always results 
in losses. 
Gambling 
Gambling means betting on games of chance or skill. It exists in all societies, 
and most people have gambled at some point in their lives. 
Freud believed that gambling was universally attractive because it was a 
substitute for masturbation. The repetitive and exciting activity of the hands, 
the irresistible urge, the resolutions to stop, the intoxicating quality of plea - 
sure, and the feelings of guilt link gambling and masturbation. 
Dr. Ralph Greenson, a prominent California psychoanalyst, has divided 
gamblers into three groups: the normal person who gambles for diversion 
and who can stop when he wishes; the professional gambler, who selects 
gambling as his means of earning a livelihood; and the neurotic gambler, 
who gambles because he is driven by unconscious needs and is unable to 
stop. 
A neurotic gambler either feels lucky or wants to test his luck. Winning 
gives him a sense of power. He feels pleased, like a baby feeding at a breast. A 
neurotic gambler always loses because he tries to re -create that omnipotent 
feeling of bliss instead of concentrating on a realistic long -term game plan. 
Dr. Sheila Blume, director of the compulsive gambling program at South 
Oaks Hospital in New York, calls gambling "an addiction without a drug." 
Most gamblers are men who gamble for the action. Women tend to gamble 
as a means of escape. Losers usually hide their losses and try to look and act 
like winners, but they are plagued by self-doubt. 
Trading stocks, futures, and options gives a gambler a high but it does 
appear more respectable than betting on the ponies, Moreover, gambling in 
the financial markets has an aura of sophistication and offers a better intel - 
lectual diversion than playing numbers with a bookie. 
7. 
SELF-DESTRUCTIVENESS 25 
Gamblers feel happy when trades go in their favor. They feel terribly low 
when they lose. They differ from successful professionals who focus on long - 
term plans and do not get particularly upset or excited in the process of trading. 
Brokers are well aware that many of their clients are gamblers. They often 
try to avoid leaving messages for traders with their wives, even when they 
call to confirm a trade. Amateurs are not the only ones involved in gam- 
bling-quite a bit of it goes on among professionals. Sonny Kleinfield 
describes in his book, The Traders, the endemic betting on sports events on 
the floors of financial exchanges. 
The key sign of gambling is the inability to resist the urge to bet. If you 
feel that you are trading too much and the results are poor, stop trading for a 
month. This will give you a chance to re-evaluate your trading. If the urge to 
trade is so strong that you cannot stay away fiom the action for a month, 
then it is time to visit your local chapter of Gamblers Anonymous or start 
using the principles of Alcoholics Anonymous, outlined later in this chapter. 
Self-sabotage 
After practicing psychiatry for many years, I became convinced that most 
failures in life are due to self-sabotage. We fail in our professional, personal, 
and business affairs not because of stupidity or incompetence, but to fulfill 
an unconscious wish to fail. 
A brilliant and witty friend of mine has a lifelong history of demolishing 
his success. As a young man, he was a successful industrial salesman and 
was sacked; he entered training as a broker and rose near the top of his firm 
but was sued; he became a well-known trader but busted out while disentan- 
gling himself from previous disasters. He blamed all his failures on envious 
bosses, incompetent regulators, and an unsupportive wife. 
Finally, he hit bottom. He had no job and no money. He borrowed a quote 
terminal from another busted-out trader and raised capital from a few people 
who had heard that he had traded well in the past. He knew how to trade and 
made money for his pool. As the word spread, more people brought in 
money. My friend was on a roll. At that point, he went on a speaking tour of 
Asia but continued to trade from the road. He took a side trip into a country 
famous for its prostitutes, leaving a very large open position with no protec - 
tive stop. By the time he returned to civilization, the markets had staged a 
major move and his pool was wiped out. Did he try to figure out his prob- 
lem? Did he try to change? No- he blamed his broker! 
26 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY 
It hurts to look within yourself for the cause of your failure. When traders 
get in trouble, they tend to blame others, bad luck, or anything else. 
A prominent trader came to me for a consultation. His equity was being 
demolished by a rally in the U.S. dollar, in which he was heavily short. He 
had grown up fighting a nasty and arrogant father. He had made a name for 
himself by betting large positions on reversals of established trends. This 
trader kept adding to his short position because he could not admit that the 
market, which represented his father, was bigger and stronger than he was. 
These are just two examples of how people act out self-destructive ten- 
dencies. We sabotage ourselves by acting like impulsive children rather than 
intelligent adults. We cling to our self-defeating patterns even though they 
can be treated - failure is a curable disease. 
The mental baggage from childhood can prevent you from succeeding in 
the markets. You have to find your weaknesses in order to change. Keep a 
trading diary - write down your reasons for entering and exiting every trade. 
Look for repetitive patterns of success and failure. 
The Demolition Derby 
Almost every profession and business provides a safety net for its members. 
Your bosses, colleagues, and clients can warn you when you behave danger - 
ously or self -destructively. There is no such support in trading, which makes 
it more dangerous than most human endeavors. The markets offer many 
opportunities to self-destruct without a safety net. 
All members of society make small allowances to protect one another 
from the consequences of our mistakes. When you drive, you try to avoid 
hitting other cars and they try to avoid hitting you. If someone swings open 
the door of a parked car, you swerve. If someone cuts in front of you on a 
highway, you may curse, but you will slow down. You avoid collisions 
because they are too costly for both parties. 
Markets operate without normal human helpfulness. Every trader tries to 
hit others. Every trader gets hit by others. The trading highway is littered 
with wrecks. Trading is the most dangerous human endeavor, short of war. 
Buying at the high point of the day is like swinging your car door open 
into the traffic. When your buy order reaches the floor, traders rush to sell to 
you - to rip your door off along with your arm. Other traders want you to fail 
because they get the money you lose. 
8. TRADING PSYCHOLOGY 2 7 
Controlling Self-Destructiveness 
Most people go through life making the same mistakes at sixty that they 
made at twenty. Others structure their lives to succeed in one area while act - 
ing out internal conflicts in another. Very few people grow out of their prob - 
lems. 
You need to be aware of your tendency to sabotage yourself: Stop blaming 
your losses on bad luck or on others and take responsibility for the results. 
Start keeping a diary-a record of all your trades, with reasons for entering 
and exiting them. Look for repetitive patterns of success and failure. Those 
who do not learn from the past are condemned to repeat it. 
You need a psychological safety net the way mountain climbers need their 
survival gear. I found the principles of Alcoholics Anonymous, outlined later 
in this chapter, to be of great help. Strict money management rules also pro- 
vide a safety net. 
If you seek therapy for your trading problems, choose a competent thera - 
pist who knows what trading is about. You are ultimately responsible for 
your own therapy and must monitor its progress. I usually tell my patients 
that if a month goes by without clear signs of improvement, then therapy is 
in trouble. When therapy shows no progress for two months, it is time to 
seek a consultation with another therapist. 
