8. TRADING PSYCHOLOGY 
Your feelings have an immediate impact on your account equity. You may 
have a brilliant trading system, but if you feel frightened, arrogant, or upset, 
your account is sure to suffer. When you recognize that a gambler's high or 
fear is clouding your mind, stop trading. Your success or failure as a trader 
depends on controlling your emotions. 
When you trade, you compete against the sharpest minds in the world. 
The field on which you compete has been slanted to ensure your failure. If 
you allow your emotions to interfere with your trading, the battle is over. 
You are responsible for every trade that you make. A trade begins when 
you decide to enter the market and grids only when you decide to take your - 
self out. Having a good trading system is not enough. Most traders with good 
systems wash out of the markets because psychologically they are not pre - 
pared to win. 
INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY 
Bending the Rules 
Markets offer enormous temptations, like walking through a gold vault or 
through a harem. Markets evoke powerful greed for more gains and a great 
fear of losing what we've got. Those feelings cloud our perceptions of 
opportunities and dangers. 
Most amateurs feel like geniuses after a winning streak. It is exciting to 
believe that you are so good you can bend your own rules and succeed. 
That's when traders deviate from their rules and go into a self -destruct mode. 
Traders gain some knowledge, they win, their emotions kick in, and they 
self-destruct. Most traders promptly give their "killings" back to the markets. 
The markets are full of rags to riches to rags stories. The hallmark of a suc- 
cessful trader is his ability to accumulate equity. 
You need to make trading as objective as possible. Keep a diary of all 
your trades with "before and after " charts, keep a spreadsheet listing all your 
trades, including commissions and slippage, and maintain very strict money 
management rules. You may have to devote as much energy to analyzing 
yourself as you do to analyzing the markets. 
When I was learning how to trade, I read every book on trading psychol - 
ogy I could find. Many writers offered sensible advice. Some stressed disci - 
pline: "You cannot let the markets sway you. Do not make decisions during 
trading hours. Plan a trade, and trade a plan." Others stressed flexibility: "Do 
not enter the market with any preconceived notions. Change your plans 
when markets change." Some experts suggested isolation - no business 
news, no Wall Street Journal, no listening to other traders, just you and the 
markets. Others advised being open -minded, keeping in touch with other 
traders and soaking up fresh ideas. Each piece of advice seemed to make 
sense but contradicted other equally sensible advice. 
I kept reading, trading, and focusing on system development. I also con- 
tinued to practice psychiatry. I never thought the two fields were con- 
nected-until I had a sudden insight. The idea that changed how I trade 
came from psychiatry. 
The Insight That Changed My Trading 
Like most psychiatrists, I always had some patients with alcohol problems. I 
also served as a consultant to a major drug rehabilitation program. It did not 
