9. TRADING LESSONS FROM AA 
take me long to realize that alcoholics and addicts were more likely to 
recover in self-help groups than in classical psychiatric settings. 
Psychotherapy, medications, and expensive hospitals and clinics can sober 
up a drunk but seldom succeed in keeping him sober. Most addicts quickly 
relapse. They have a much better chance to recover if they become active in 
Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) or other self-help groups. 
Once I realized that AA members were likely to stay sober and rebuild 
their lives, I became a big fan of Alcoholics Anonymous. I began sending 
patients with drinking problems to AA and related groups, such as ACOA 
(Adult Children of Alcoholics). Now, if an alcoholic comes to me for treat- 
ment, I insist that he also go to AA. I tell him that to do otherwise would 
mean wasting our time and his money. 
One night, many years ago, I stopped by a friend's office on the way to a 
party at our department of psychiatry. We had two hours before the party, 
and my friend, who was a recovering alcoholic, said: "Do you want to take 
in a movie or go to an AA meeting?" I had sent many patients to AA but had 
never been to a meeting, since I have never had a drinking problem. I 
jumped at a chance to attend an AA meeting- it was a new experience. 
The meeting was held at a local YMCA. A dozen men and a few women 
sat on folding chairs in a plain room. The meeting lasted an hour. I was 
amazed by what I heard - these people seemed to talk about my trading! 
They talked about alcohol, but as long as I substituted the word "loss" for 
"alcohol," most of what they said applied to me! My account equity was still 
swinging up and down in those days. I left that YMCA room knowing that I 
had to handle my losses the way AA handles alcoholism. 
9. TRADING LESSONS FROM AA 
Almost any drunk can stay sober for a few days. Soon, the urge to drink 
overwhelms him again and he returns to the bottle. He cannot resist his urge 
because he continues to feel and think like an alcoholic. Sobriety begins and 
ends inside a person's mind. 
Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) has a system for changing the way people 
think and feel about drinking. AA members use a 12-step program for 
changing their minds. These 12 steps, described in the book Twelve Steps 
and Twelve Traditions, refer to 12 stages of personal growth. Recovering 
alcoholics attend meetings where they share their experiences with other 
30 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY 
recovering alcoholics, supporting each other in their sobriety. Any member 
can get a sponsor - another AA member whom he can call for support when 
he feels the urge to drink. 
AA was founded in the 1930s by two alcoholics - a doctor and a traveling 
salesman. They began meeting and helping each other stay sober. They 
developed a system that worked so well, others began to join them. AA has 
only one goal - to help its members stay sober. It does no fund-raising, takes 
no political positions, and runs no promotional campaigns. AA keeps grow- 
ing thanks only to word of mouth. It owes its success only to its effective- 
ness. 
The 12-step program of AA is so effective that people with other prob- 
lems now use it. There are 12-step groups for children of alcoholics, smok - 
ers, gamblers, and others. I have become convinced that traders can stop los- 
ing money in the markets if they apply the key principles of Alcoholics 
Anonymous to their trading. 
Denial 
A social drinker enjoys a cocktail or a glass of wine or beer but stops when 
he feels he's had enough. An alcoholic's chemistry is different. Once an 
alcoholic takes a drink, he feels an urge to drink more, until he gets drunk. 
A drunk often says that he needs to cut down on alcohol, but he cannot 
admit that his drinking is out of control. Most drunks deny that they are alco- 
holics. Try telling an alcoholic relative, friend, or employee that his drinking 
is out of control and damaging his life and you will run into a wall of denial. 
An alcoholic often says: "My boss fired me 'cause I was hung over and 
came in late. My wife took the kids and left 'cause she had no sense to begin 
with. My landlord is trying to kick me out of the apartment 'cause I'm a little , 
behind on the rent. I'm gonna have to cut down on my drinking, and every- 
thing will be all right." 
This man has lost his family and his job. He is about to lose the roof over 
his head. His life is spinning out of control- but he keeps saying that he can 
cut down on his drinking. This is denial! 
Alcoholics deny their problems while their lives are falling apart. Most of 
them nurse the fantasy of being able to control their drinking. As long as an 
alcoholic believes that he can "control his drinking," he is headed downhill. 
Nothing will ever change, even if he gets a new job, a new wife, and a new 
landlord. 
9. TRADING LESSONS FROM AA 3 1 
Alcoholics deny that alcohol controls their lives. When they talk of reduc - 
ing drinking, they talk about managing the unmanageable. They are like a 
driver whose car spins out of control on a mountain road. When the car 
careens down a cliff, it is too late to promise to drive carefully. An alco- 
holic's life careens out of control while he denies he's an alcoholic. 
There is a starkparallel between an alcoholic and a trader whose account 
is being demolished by losses. He keeps changing trading tactics, acting like 
an alcoholic who tries to solve his problem by switching from hard liquor to 
beer. A loser denies that he has lost control over his course in the market. 
Rock Bottom 
A drunk can begin his journey to recovery only after he admits that he is an 
alcoholic. He must see that alcohol controls his life and not the other way 
around. Most drunks cannot accept this painful truth. They can face it only 
after they hit rock bottom. 
Some alcoholics hit rock bottom when they develop a life-threatening ill- 
ness. Others hit rock bottom after being rejected by their family or losing a 
job. An alcoholic needs to sink to a point so low, so deep down in the gutter, 
so unbearably painful that it finally penetrates his denial. 
The pain of hitting rock bottom feels intolerable. It makes an alcoholic see 
how deeply he has sunk. This pain penetrates his denial. He sees a stark and 
simple choice-either turn his life around or die. Only then is an alcoholic 
ready to begin his journey to recovery. 
Profits make traders feel powerful and give them an emotional high. They 
try to get high again, put on reckless trades, and give back their profits. Most 
traders cannot stand the pain of a string of severe losses. They die as traders 
afrer hitting rock bottom and wash out of the markets. The few survivors 
realize that the main trouble is not with their methods, the trouble is with 
their thinking. They can change and become successful traders. 
The First Step 
An alcoholic who wants to recover has to go through twelve steps - twelve 
stages of personal growth. He needs to change how he thinks and feels, how 
he relates to himself and others. The first step of AA is the hardest. 
The first step an alcoholic has to take is to admit that he is powerless over 
INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY 
alcohol. He must admit that his life has become unmanageable, that alcohol 
is stronger than he is. Most alcoholics cannot take that step, drop out, and go 
on to destroy their lives. 
If alcohol is stronger than you, then you can never touch it again, not a sip 
for as long as you live. You have to give up drinking forever. Most drunks do 
not want to give up that pleasure. They destroy their lives rather than take 
the first step of AA. Only the pain of hitting rock bottom can supply the 
motivation to take that first step. 
One Day at a Time 
You have probably seen bumper stickers on cars that say "One day at a time" 
or "Easy does it." Those are AA slogans, and people who drive those cars 
are probably recovering alcoholics. 
Planning for life without alcohol can seem overwhelming. That's why AA 
encourages its members to live sober one day at a time. 
The goal of every AA member is to stay sober today and go to bed sober 
tonight. 
~raduall~, days become weeks, then months, then years. AA meet- 
ings and other activities help each recovering ii!coholic stay sober, one day at 
a time. 
Recovering alcoholics receive - and give others - invaluable support and 
fellowship at these meetings. They are held at all hours, all over the world. 
Traders have much to learn from those meetings. 
An AA Meeting 
One of the best things that a trader can do is go to an AA meeting. I espe- 
cially recommend it to a trader on a losing streak. Call Alcoholics 
Anonymous and ask about the next "open meeting " or "beginners' meeting " 
in your area. 
A meeting lasts about an hour. You can sit in the back of the room and lis- 
ten carefully. There is no pressure to speak, and nobody asks for your last 
name. 
Each meeting begins with a long -term member getting up and speaking 
about his or her personal struggle for recovery from alcoholism. Several 
other members share their experiences. There is a collection to cover 
expenses-most people give a dollar. All you have to do is listen carefully, 
10. LOSERS ANONYMOUS 33 
and every time you hear the word "alcohol," substitute the word "loss" for it. 
You will feel as if the people in the meeting are talking about your trading! 
